{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;
\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f4\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial-BoldMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red49\green112\blue185;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;
\red66\green66\blue66;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c23922\c52157\c77647;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;
\cssrgb\c32941\c32941\c32941;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Lipids 
\f1\b0\fs24 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf4 \cb3 Lipids 
\f1\b0 contain 
\f0\b carbon
\f1\b0 , 
\f0\b hydrogen
\f1\b0 , and 
\f0\b oxygen 
\f1\b0 atoms 
\f0\b (CHO)
\f1\b0 , like carbohydrates. However, they have long 
\f0\b hydrocarbon 
\f1\b0 tails, making them very 
\f0\b hydrophobic
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Triacylglycerol (triglyceride) 
\f1\b0 is a lipid molecule with 
\f0\b a glycerol backbone 
\f1\b0 (three carbons and three hydroxyl groups) and 
\f0\b three fatty acids 
\f1\b0 (long hydrocarbon tails). Glycerol and the three fatty acids are connected by 
\f0\b ester linkages
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 \
Saturated fatty acids 
\f1\b0 have no double bonds and as a result pack 
\f2\i tightly 
\f1\i0 (solid at room temperature). \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Unsaturated fatty acids 
\f1\b0 have double bonds. They can be divided into 
\f0\b monounsaturated fatty acids 
\f1\b0 (
\f2\i one 
\f1\i0 double bond) and 
\f0\b polyunsaturated fatty acids 
\f1\b0 (
\f2\i two or more 
\f1\i0 double bonds). \cb1 \

\f2\i \cb3 Cis
\f0\i0\b -unsaturated fatty acids 
\f1\b0 have 
\f2\i kinks 
\f1\i0 that cause the hydrocarbon tails to bend. As a result, they do 
\f2\i not 
\f1\i0 pack tightly.\cb1 \uc0\u8232 
\f2\i \cb3 Trans
\f0\i0\b -unsaturated fatty acids 
\f1\b0 have straighter hydrocarbon tails, so they pack 
\f2\i tightly
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 \
Phospholipids 
\f1\b0 are lipid molecules that have a 
\f0\b glycerol backbone, one phosphate group, 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b two fatty acids. 
\f1\b0 The phosphate group is 
\f2\i polar 
\f1\i0 while the fatty acids are 
\f2\i nonpolar
\f1\i0 . As a result, they are 
\f0\b amphipathic 
\f1\b0 (hydrophobic 
\f2\i and 
\f1\i0 hydrophilic). Furthermore, they spontaneously assemble into a 
\f0\b lipid bilayer
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Cholesterol 
\f1\b0 is also a lipid molecule that is a component of the cell membranes and is 
\f0\b amphipathic
\f1\b0 . It is the most common precursor to 
\f0\b steroid hormones 
\f1\b0 (lipids that have 
\f2\i four 
\f1\i0 hydrocarbon rings). Cholesterol is also the starting material for 
\f0\b vitamin D 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b bile acids
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\cb3 \
Factors that influence 
\f0\b membrane fluidity: 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\cb3 1. 
\f0\b Temperature 
\f1\b0 - 
\f3 \cf5 \uc0\u8593  
\f1 \cf4 temperatures 
\f2\i increase 
\f1\i0 fluidity while 
\f3 \cf5 \uc0\u8595  
\f1 \cf4 temperatures 
\f2\i decrease 
\f1\i0 it. \cb1 \
\cb3 2. 
\f0\b Cholesterol 
\f1\b0 - 
\f2\i holds 
\f1\i0 membrane together at high temperatures and 
\f2\i keeps 
\f1\i0 membrane 
\f2\i fluid 
\f1\i0 at low temperatures. \cb1 \
\cb3 3. 
\f0\b Degrees of unsaturation 
\f1\b0 - 
\f2\i saturated 
\f1\i0 fatty acids pack more tightly than 
\f2\i unsaturated 
\f1\i0 fatty acids, which have double bonds that may introduce 
\f2\i kinks
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 \
Lipoproteins 
\f1\b0 allow the transport of lipid molecules in the bloodstream due to an outer coat of 
\f2\i phospholipids
\f1\i0 , 
\f2\i cholesterol
\f1\i0 , and 
\f2\i proteins
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f4\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Low-density lipoproteins (LDLs) 
\f1\b0 - 
\f2\i low 
\f1\i0 protein density and 
\f2\i deliver 
\f1\i0 cholesterol to peripheral tissues. \'93
\f0\b Bad cholesterol
\f1\b0 \'94 and vessel blockage can occur (heart disease). \cb1 \

\f3 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0\b High-density lipoproteins (HDLs) 
\f1\b0 - 
\f2\i high 
\f1\i0 protein density and take cholesterol 
\f2\i away 
\f1\i0 from peripheral tissues. \'93
\f0\b Good cholesterol
\f1\b0 \'94 because they deliver cholesterol to the 
\f0\b liver 
\f1\b0 to make 
\f2\i bile 
\f1\i0 (
\f2\i reduces 
\f1\i0 blood lipid levels). \
\cb1 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\b \cb3 Waxes 
\f1\b0 are simple lipids that have long fatty acids connected to 
\f0\b monohydroxy alcohols 
\f1\b0 (contain a 
\f2\i single 
\f1\i0 hydroxyl group) through 
\f2\i ester linkages
\f1\i0 . Used mainly as 
\f0\b hydrophobic protective coatings
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\b \cb3 Carotenoids 
\f1\b0 are lipid derivatives containing long carbon chains with 
\f2\i conjugated double bonds 
\f1\i0 and six-membered 
\f2\i rings 
\f1\i0 at each end. They function mainly as 
\f0\b pigments
\f1\b0 . \
\
\pard\tx560\tx6692\pardeftab720\sl180\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \uc0\u8232 \
}