{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;
\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f4\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f5\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial-BoldMT;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red49\green112\blue185;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c23922\c52157\c77647;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;
}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Patterns of Inheritance 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Incomplete dominance 
\f1\b0 is the situation where one allele is 
\f2\i not completely expressed 
\f1\i0 over its paired allele. The heterozygous will have an 
\f0\b intermediate 
\f1\b0 state. (Ex. red x white = 
\f2\i pink
\f1\i0 ). \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Codominance 
\f1\b0 is the situation where the heterozygous will express 
\f0\b both alleles
\f2\i\b0 . 
\f1\i0 (Ex. red x white = 
\f2\i red + white spots
\f1\i0 ). \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Multiple alleles 
\f1\b0 describes when there are 
\f0\b more allele options 
\f1\b0 than just two. (Ex. ABO blood typing - 
\f2\i A, B, O alleles
\f1\i0 ). \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Epistasis 
\f1\b0 is when one gene affects the 
\f2\i expression 
\f1\i0 of a 
\f0\b different gene
\f1\b0 . (Ex. 
\f2\i baldness 
\f1\i0 gene covers up the genes for 
\f2\i hair color
\f1\i0 ). \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Pleiotropy 
\f1\b0 describes when 
\f0\b one gene 
\f1\b0 is responsible for 
\f0\b many traits
\f1\b0 . (Ex. 
\f2\i cystic fibrosis
\f1\i0 , disease with many symptoms caused by a 
\f2\i single gene
\f1\i0 ). \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Polygenic inheritance 
\f1\b0 when 
\f0\b many genes 
\f1\b0 are responsible for 
\f0\b one trait
\f1\b0 . This gives the trait 
\f0\b continuous variation
\f1\b0 . (Ex. 
\f2\i height
\f1\i0 , a single trait affected by 
\f2\i many genes
\f1\i0 ). \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \cb3 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 Gene Defects 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Haploinsufficiency 
\f1\b0 occurs when one copy of the gene is 
\f2\i lost 
\f1\i0 or 
\f2\i nonfunctional 
\f1\i0 and the remaining copy is 
\f0\b not sufficient 
\f1\b0 for a normal phenotype. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Haplosufficiency 
\f1\b0 describes when the remaining copy of the gene is 
\f0\b sufficient 
\f1\b0 for a normal phenotype. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Proto-oncogenes 
\f1\b0 are genes that can become 
\f0\b oncogenes 
\f1\b0 (cancer-causing genes) due to 
\f0\b gain-of-function 
\f1\b0 mutations. Gain-of-function mutations cause 
\f0\b too much 
\f1\b0 protein to be made or production of an 
\f0\b over-active 
\f1\b0 protein. Cancerous growth occurs as a result because proto-oncogenes are normally involved in 
\f2\i cell cycle control
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \

\f2\i \cb3 Proto-oncogenes 
\f1\i0 follow the 
\f0\b one hit hypothesis
\f1\b0 , which states that a gain-of-function mutation in 
\f2\i one 
\f1\i0 copy of the gene turns it into a 
\f2\i oncogene
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \
\cb3 \

\f0\b Tumor-suppressor genes 
\f1\b0 are genes that become cancerous as a result of 
\f0\b loss-of-function 
\f1\b0 mutations because they are normally needed to 
\f2\i suppress 
\f1\i0 cancerous growth. \cb1 \

\f2\i \cb3 Tumor-suppressor genes 
\f1\i0 follow the 
\f0\b two hit hypothesis
\f1\b0 , which states that a loss-of-function mutation in 
\f2\i both 
\f1\i0 copies of the gene are needed to make it cancer-causing. Thus, tumor-suppressor genes are 
\f0\b haplosufficient
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Null alleles 
\f1\b0 come from mutations that cause the alleles to lack normal function. Tumor-suppressor genes have 
\f2\i null alleles 
\f1\i0 when they become cancer-causing. \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f3 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 p53 
\f1\b0 is an important tumor-suppressor gene that is known as the 
\f0\b guardian of the cell
\f1\b0 . It is 
\f0\b upregulated 
\f1\b0 to prevent cells from becoming cancerous. \cb1 \

\f3 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 p21 
\f1\b0 is another tumor-suppressor gene that inhibits 
\f0\b phosphorylation 
\f1\b0 activity in order to decrease rampant cell division. \cb1 \

\f3 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Retinoblastoma gene (RB) 
\f1\b0 is a tumor-suppressor gene that codes for a 
\f2\i retinoblastoma protein
\f1\i0 , which prevents excessive cell growth during 
\f0\b interphase
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 Mendel\'92s Laws 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Gregor Mendel 
\f1\b0 studied genetics and proposed 
\f0\b three laws
\f1\b0 : \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 1.  \cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Law of dominance 
\f1\b0 - 
\f0\b dominant 
\f1\b0 alleles mask the expression of 
\f0\b recessive 
\f1\b0 alleles. Mendel studied 
\f2\i plant height 
\f1\i0 to come to this conclusion. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 2.  \cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Law of segregation 
\f1\b0 - homologous gene copies 
\f0\b separate 
\f1\b0 during meiosis (specifically 
\f2\i anaphase I
\f1\i0 ). Thus, Aa individuals will produce gametes with \'93A\'94 or \'93a\'94 alleles. \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 3. 
\f1\b0 \cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 
\f0\b Law of independent assortment 
\f1\b0 - homologous chromosomes line up 
\f0\b independently 
\f1\b0 during 
\f2\i metaphase I 
\f1\i0 of meiosis so that alleles separate 
\f0\b randomly 
\f1\b0 (increases 
\f2\i genetic variability
\f1\i0 ). Metaphase II is different, during which 
\f2\i sister chromatids 
\f1\i0 are pulled apart instead. The law of independent assortment can produce 
\f0\b 2\cf4 \cb3 \up10 23 
\f1\b0 \cf4 \cb3 \up0 options (23 homologous chromosome pairs split). \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 Nondisjunction and Aneuploidies 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Nondisjunction 
\f1\b0 is the 
\f2\i improper 
\f1\i0 segregation of chromosome pairs during anaphase and produces daughter cells with an 
\f0\b incorrect number of chromosomes
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\cb3 1. 
\f0\b Single nondisjunction 
\f1\b0 of 
\f2\i homologous chromosomes 
\f1\i0 during 
\f0\b meiosis I 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 46 
\f1\b0 chromosomes in diploid parent cell\cb1 \uc0\u8232 
\f4 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u8594 \cf4 \cb1 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 24, 24, 22, 22 
\f1\b0 chromosomes in haploid daughter cells \
\cb1 \
\cb3 2. 
\f0\b Single nondisjunction 
\f1\b0 of 
\f2\i sister chromatids 
\f1\i0 during 
\f0\b meiosis II 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 46 
\f1\b0 chromosomes in diploid parent cell\cb1 \uc0\u8232 
\f4 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u8594 \cf4 \cb1 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 24, 22, 23, 23 
\f1\b0 chromosomes in haploid daughter cells \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 3. 
\f0\b Single nondisjunction 
\f1\b0 of 
\f2\i sister chromatids 
\f1\i0 during 
\f0\b mitosis 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 46 
\f1\b0 chromosomes in diploid parent cell\cb1 \uc0\u8232 
\f4 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u8594 \cf4 \cb1 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 47, 45 
\f1\b0 chromosomes in diploid daughter cells \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 Aneuploidy 
\f1\b0 refers to an 
\f2\i abnormal 
\f1\i0 number of chromosomes in the daughter cells. After fertilization, 
\f0\b trisomy 
\f1\b0 (3 chromosomes copies) or 
\f0\b monosomy 
\f1\b0 (1 chromosome copies) can occur. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Down syndrome 
\f1\b0 is a trisomy of chromosome #21 (each diploid cell has 
\f2\i 47 chromosomes 
\f1\i0 total). \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Turner syndrome 
\f1\b0 is a monosomy of the X chromosome in females (each diploid cell has 
\f2\i 45 chromosomes 
\f1\i0 total). Individuals have physical abnormalities and sterility. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Klinefelter\'92s syndrome 
\f1\b0 is a trisomy of the sex chromosomes in males, giving them XXY (each diploid cell has 
\f2\i 47 chromosomes 
\f1\i0 total). Individuals usually have disorders in intellectual, physical, and reproductive development. \cb1 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 Crosses 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 A 
\f0\b cross 
\f1\b0 refers to when two organisms are mated to produce offspring. \cb1 \
\cb3 A 
\f0\b test-cross 
\f1\b0 pairs an individual of 
\f2\i unknown 
\f1\i0 genotype with one that is 
\f2\i homozygous recessive
\f1\i0 . By looking at the 
\f0\b offspring 
\f1\b0 from a test-cross, we can determine the unknown genotype. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 True-breeding 
\f1\b0 organisms are 
\f2\i homozygous 
\f1\i0 for all the traits of interest. \cb1 \
\cb3 The 
\f0\b F1 generation 
\f1\b0 (aka 
\f0\b filial 1 hybrid
\f1\b0 ) is the 
\f2\i first 
\f1\i0 generation cross between true-breeding parents with different alleles. The offspring are all 
\f2\i heterozygous
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \
\cb3 The 
\f0\b F2 generation 
\f1\b0 (aka 
\f0\b filial 2 hybrid
\f1\b0 ) is the 
\f2\i second 
\f1\i0 generation cross between the heterozygous offspring from the F1 generation. This is where Mendel\'92s three laws can be studied. \cb1 \
\cb3 If these two generations are studied under 
\f0\b monohybrid crosses
\f1\b0 , then only a 
\f2\i single gene 
\f1\i0 is examined. In the F2 generation, the 
\f2\i genotype ratio 
\f0\i0\b (AA:Aa:aa) 
\f1\b0 should be 
\f0\b (1:2:1) 
\f1\b0 and the 
\f2\i phenotype ratio 
\f0\i0\b (dominant:recessive) 
\f1\b0 should be 
\f0\b (3:1)
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\cb3 On the other hand, a 
\f0\b dihybrid cross 
\f1\b0 examines the inheritance of 
\f2\i two genes 
\f1\i0 on 
\f0\b separate 
\f1\b0 chromosomes. Although the 
\f2\i genotype ratio 
\f1\i0 is complex in the F2 generation, just remember that the 
\f2\i phenotype ratio 
\f0\i0\b (both dominant:one dominant one recessive:one dominant one recessive:both recessive) 
\f1\b0 should be 
\f0\b (9:3:3:1)
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Punnett squares 
\f1\b0 are used to visualize these crosses but are too complex for dihybrid cross. Thus, 
\f0\b one-gene cross ratios 
\f1\b0 can be used to solve these questions faster. Below are the 
\f0\b single allele crosses you should memorize
\f1\b0 : \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 1. Homozygous x homozygous = 1/1 AA or 1/1 Aa or 1/1 aa \
2. Homozygous x heterozygous = 1\uc0\u8260 2 AA (or aa) and 1\u8260 2 Aa \
3. Heterozygous x heterozygous = 1\uc0\u8260 4 AA, 1\u8260 2 Aa, 1\u8260 4 aa \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 Pedigree Analysis 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Pedigree charts 
\f1\b0 are used to track 
\f2\i traits 
\f1\i0 over many generations to see how they are 
\f2\i inherited
\f1\i0 . Females are 
\f0\b circles 
\f1\b0 while males are 
\f0\b squares
\f1\b0 . Furthermore, unaffected individuals are 
\f0\b unshaded 
\f1\b0 while affected individuals are 
\f0\b shaded
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 Gene linkage 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Linked genes 
\f1\b0 are found 
\f2\i close together 
\f1\i0 on the 
\f2\i same 
\f1\i0 chromosome. By looking at 
\f0\b recombination frequencies
\f1\b0 , we can deduce the relative distance between these genes. \cb1 \
\cb3 One 
\f0\b map unit 
\f1\b0 is defined as the chromosomal distance that would allow 
\f0\b 0.01 
\f1\b0 crossover events per generation. 
\f2\i 20 map units 
\f1\i0 would mean 0.2 crossover events occur between the two genes per generation, or 
\f2\i 20% chance of recombination
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \
\cb3 Recombination frequencies of 
\f0\b less than 50% 
\f1\b0 mean that the two genes are 
\f0\b linked
\f1\b0 . A random assortment of 
\f0\b unlinked 
\f1\b0 genes have 
\f0\b 50% recombinant progeny
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Linkage maps 
\f1\b0 can be drawn out using 
\f2\i map units 
\f1\i0 to 
\f0\b infer 
\f1\b0 the distance between genes on a chromosome. \cb1 \
\cb3 A 
\f0\b haplotype 
\f1\b0 is a group of genes that are usually inherited together because they are located in close proximity to each other. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Sex-linked traits 
\f1\b0 come from genes located on the 
\f2\i sex chromosomes
\f1\i0 . Most sex-linked disorders have 
\f0\b X-chromosome linkage
\f1\b0 . Below are 
\f0\b three types 
\f1\b0 of sex-linked traits: \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 1. X-linked dominant 
\f1\b0 - dominant inheritance on the X chromosome. 
\f0\b Any 
\f1\b0 offspring (male or female) that receive the affected allele 
\f2\i will end up with the disorder
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 2. X-linked recessive 
\f1\b0 - recessive inheritance on the X chromosome. For males, only 
\f2\i one 
\f1\i0 affected allele is needed to cause the disorder. For females, 
\f2\i two 
\f1\i0 affected alleles are needed to cause the disorder because females have two X chromosomes. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 3. Y-linked 
\f1\b0 - inheritance on the Y chromosome. Can only be passed from 
\f0\b father to son
\f1\b0 . Will 
\f2\i always 
\f1\i0 be expressed whether it is dominant or recessive because males only have one Y chromosome. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Genomic imprinting 
\f1\b0 refers to genes that are expressed depending on 
\f2\i parental origin 
\f1\i0 and are influenced by 
\f0\b epigenetic factors
\f1\b0 . These genes are different from sex-linked traits because they can come from 
\f2\i autosomal chromosomes 
\f1\i0 (non-sex chromosomes) as well. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 X-inactivation 
\f1\b0 is the process by which one of a female\'92s X chromosomes is 
\f2\i inactivated
\f1\i0 , forming a 
\f0\b Barr body 
\f1\b0 and preventing 
\f2\i excess 
\f1\i0 transcription. However, a female carrier may become an 
\f0\b affected 
\f1\b0 individual for a disease if her unaffected X chromosome with a 
\f2\i normal wild-type allele 
\f1\i0 is inactivated, leaving behind a 
\f2\i recessive allele 
\f1\i0 that is not covered up. \cb1 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 Epigenetics 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Epigenetics 
\f1\b0 does not involve modifying the genetic code, but instead the 
\f2\i regulation 
\f1\i0 of when genes are expressed. Epigenetic changes are 
\f0\b heritable
\f1\b0 . Below are some examples of 
\f0\b epigenetic changes
\f1\b0 : \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f5\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 DNA methylation 
\f1\b0 - causes gene 
\f0\b suppression 
\f1\b0 through the addition of 
\f2\i methyl groups
\f1\i0 , recruiting methyl-binding proteins (MBDs) and preventing transcription factors from binding. \cb1 \

\f5\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Histone acetylation 
\f1\b0 - causes gene 
\f0\b activation 
\f1\b0 and formation of 
\f0\b euchromatin 
\f1\b0 (easily accessible DNA). \cb1 \

\f5\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Histone de-acetylation 
\f1\b0 - causes gene 
\f0\b suppression 
\f1\b0 and formation of 
\f0\b heterochromatin 
\f1\b0 (hard to access DNA). \cb1 \

\f5\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Histone methylation 
\f1\b0 - can upregulate 
\f0\b or 
\f1\b0 downregulate gene 
\f0\b expression 
\f1\b0 depending on methyl group 
\f2\i location 
\f1\i0 and 
\f2\i number. 
\f1\i0 \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb1 \
\
}