{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;
\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f4\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial-BoldMT;\f5\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red49\green112\blue185;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c23922\c52157\c77647;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;
}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Biological Interactions 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 In 
\f0\b competition
\f1\b0 , (
\f2\i short-term 
\f1\i0 interaction) 2 species compete for the 
\f2\i same resources. 
\f1\i0 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f3 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0\b Intraspecific competition 
\f1\b0 occurs between members of the 
\f2\i same species 
\f1\i0 (eg. two rabbits competing for carrots). \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f4\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0 Exploitation competition 
\f1\b0 is 
\f2\i indirect
\f1\i0 . Occurs when resources are 
\f2\i depleted
\f1\i0 . (eg. cheetahs deplete gazelle population, affecting lions). \cb1 \

\f4\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0 Apparent competition 
\f1\b0 occurs when one predator preys on two species. \cb1 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Symbiosis 
\f1\b0 (living together) is a 
\f2\i close, long-term interaction 
\f1\i0 between two organisms (symbionts). \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f4\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Mutualism 
\f1\b0 (+/+): 
\f2\i both 
\f1\i0 organisms 
\f2\i benefit 
\f1\i0 (eg. oxpecker bird eating ticks off rhino). \cb1 \

\f4\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Commensalism 
\f1\b0 (+/0): 
\f2\i one 
\f1\i0 organism 
\f2\i benefits 
\f1\i0 and the other is 
\f2\i unaffected
\f1\i0 . (eg. jackal eating tiger\'92s leftovers). \cb1 \

\f4\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Parasitism 
\f1\b0 (+/-): one organism benefits 
\f2\i at the other\'92s expense
\f1\i0 . (eg. tapeworm in human gastrointestinal tract). \cb1 \
\

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 Ecological Succession 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Ecological succession 
\f1\b0 is the 
\f2\i predictable 
\f1\i0 process where an ecological community develops and changes over time. Occurs in a 
\f2\i new habitat 
\f1\i0 or 
\f2\i after a disturbance
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Primary succession 
\f1\b0 occurs after a 
\f2\i large 
\f1\i0 disturbance in an area that has 
\f2\i never supported life
\f1\i0 . Begins with a 
\f0\b pioneer species 
\f1\b0 (eg. lichen, fungi, algae). \cb1 \
\cb3 The order of organisms colonizing is: pioneer species 
\f5 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 thin soil 
\f5 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 vascular plants (grasses, shrubs) 
\f5 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 larger plants (trees) 
\f5 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 animals \cb1 \
\cb3 Eventually a 
\f0\b climax community 
\f1\b0 results. A 
\f2\i steady state 
\f1\i0 is reached and a 
\f2\i balance 
\f1\i0 of species is achieved. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 \
Secondary succession 
\f1\b0 occurs on terrain that 
\f2\i has supported life 
\f1\i0 previously
\f2\i , 
\f1\i0 and has had destruction following a disturbance (eg. flood, fire). Follows a similar pattern as primary succession but begins with 
\f2\i grasses & shrubs
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \
\
\cb3 A 
\f0\b keystone species 
\f1\b0 maintains 
\f2\i ecological balance 
\f1\i0 despite 
\f2\i low abundance 
\f1\i0 (eg. 
\f0\b keystone predator 
\f1\b0 hunts other animals and 
\f2\i prevents 
\f1\i0 overabundance). \cb1 \
}