{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;
\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f4\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f5\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial-BoldMT;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red49\green112\blue185;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c23922\c52157\c77647;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;
}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Types of Animal Behaviors 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \ul \ulc0 Inherited Behaviors: \cf4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone \

\f0\b \cb3 1. Instincts: 
\f2\i\b0 innate 
\f1\i0 behaviors occurring 
\f2\i without thought. 
\f1\i0 eg: birds undergoing migration in response to seasonal changes. \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 2. Reflexes 
\f1\b0 are 
\f2\i involuntary 
\f1\i0 rapid responses to a stimulus. 
\f0\b Reflex arcs 
\f1\b0 are controlled by a 
\f0\b neural circuit
\f1\b0 . There are 2 types: \cb1 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	1.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Simple reflexes 
\f1\b0 are 
\f2\i most rapid
\f1\i0 . An 
\f0\b afferent sensory neuron 
\f1\b0 travels from 
\f2\i stimulus 
\f1\i0 to 
\f2\i central nervous system 
\f1\i0 and synapses on 
\f0\b efferent motor neurons 
\f1\b0 which travel from 
\f2\i central nervous system 
\f1\i0 to 
\f2\i muscle. \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\i0\b \cf4 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl300\sa240\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls2\ilvl0\cf4    2.    \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Complex reflexes 
\f1\b0 are 
\f2\i slower 
\f1\i0 because peripheral nerves are 
\f2\i separated 
\f1\i0 by an 
\f0\b interneuron
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
3. Fixed Action Patterns
\f1\b0 : hardwired actions initiated by a 
\f2\i specific stimulus 
\f1\i0 (
\f0\b releaser 
\f1\b0 or 
\f0\b sign stimuli
\f1\b0 ) and considered the 
\f2\i simplest form 
\f1\i0 of an instinct. Once initiated, will 
\f2\i continue to completion 
\f1\i0 even if the stimulus is 
\f2\i removed during 
\f1\i0 the behavior. Leads to 
\f2\i predictable 
\f1\i0 and 
\f2\i appropriate 
\f1\i0 behaviors that 
\f2\i do not 
\f1\i0 need to be learned. (ex: goose rolling egg back into nest, male insects attacking red bellied males). \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 4. Imprinting
\f1\b0 : an innate way that animals 
\f2\i learn 
\f1\i0 behaviors that will 
\f2\i never 
\f1\i0 be forgotten. Occurs during the 
\f0\b critical period 
\f1\b0 or 
\f0\b critical imprinting stage 
\f1\b0 (eg: ducklings treating a moving object as their mother & following it). \cb1 \
\
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \ul Learned Behaviors:\

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone Learned behaviors 
\f2\i\b0 increase 
\f1\i0 an animal\'92s fitness, allowing it to 
\f2\i adapt 
\f1\i0 to unexpected events. \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 1. Classical conditioning
\f1\b0 : pairing a 
\f0\b neutral stimulus 
\f1\b0 (elicits 
\f2\i no 
\f1\i0 physiological response) to an 
\f0\b unconditioned stimulus 
\f1\b0 (naturally 
\f2\i elicits 
\f1\i0 a physiological response - 
\f0\b unconditioned response
\f1\b0 ). This 
\f2\i conditions 
\f1\i0 the unconditioned response to be mentally 
\f2\i paired 
\f1\i0 with a neutral stimulus (
\f2\i becomes 
\f1\i0 a 
\f0\b conditioned stimulus
\f1\b0 ) resulting in a 
\f0\b conditioned response
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f3 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0\b Stimulus generalization
\f1\b0 : a conditioned animal responds to stimuli 
\f2\i not 
\f1\i0 identical to the original conditioned stimulus. The 
\f2\i more 
\f1\i0 a stimulus differs from the original conditioned stimulus, the 
\f2\i smaller 
\f1\i0 the conditioned response (
\f0\b stimulus generalization gradient
\f1\b0 ). \cb1 \

\f3 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0\b Stimulus discrimination
\f1\b0 : 
\f2\i differentiation 
\f1\i0 between a conditioned stimulus and other similar, but 
\f2\i different
\f1\i0 , non-conditioned stimuli. \cb1 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 2. Operant conditioning
\f1\b0 : learning to associate a behavior with a 
\f0\b reward 
\f1\b0 (
\f2\i increases 
\f1\i0 behavior) or a 
\f0\b punishment 
\f1\b0 (
\f2\i decreases 
\f1\i0 behavior). \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 3. Associative Learning: 
\f1\b0 learning that two things are connected to each other. 
\f2\i Increases 
\f1\i0 stimulus response 
\f2\i efficiency
\f1\i0 . Can be 
\f2\i forgotten 
\f1\i0 (
\f0\b extinction) 
\f1\b0 or 
\f2\i remembered 
\f1\i0 via re-association (
\f0\b recovery
\f1\b0 ) \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f3 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0\b Spatial learning: 
\f1\b0 associating a response with a 
\f2\i specific location
\f0\i0\b . 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \

\f3 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0\b Sensitization: 
\f1\b0 as stimulus occurs 
\f2\i more often
\f1\i0 , behavioral response 
\f2\i increases. 
\f1\i0 \cb1 \

\f3 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0\b Habituation
\f1\b0 : 
\f2\i decreasing 
\f1\i0 behavioral response in response to repetitive 
\f2\i meaningless 
\f1\i0 stimulus. If stimulus is absent for some time, 
\f0\b spontaneous recovery 
\f1\b0 of the behavior can occur. \cb1 \

\f3 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0\b Observational learning: 
\f1\b0 learning by 
\f2\i watching 
\f1\i0 another animal perform the 
\f2\i same 
\f1\i0 behavior. Animal learns 
\f2\i without 
\f1\i0 reinforcement and 
\f2\i increases 
\f1\i0 efficiency. \cb1 \

\f3 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0\b Insight
\f1\b0 : learning in a 
\f2\i new 
\f1\i0 situation. 
\f2\i No 
\f1\i0 reinforcement required. \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 Animal Movements 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 1. Kinesis
\f1\b0 : 
\f2\i changing speed 
\f1\i0 in 
\f2\i random 
\f1\i0 directions - 
\f2\i no 
\f1\i0 target (
\f2\i Favourable 
\f1\i0 environment 
\f4 \uc0\u8594  
\f2\i reduce 
\f1\i0 speed; 
\f2\i Unfavourable 
\f1\i0 environment 
\f4 \uc0\u8594  
\f2\i increase 
\f1\i0 speed). eg: flatworm escaping when exposed to light. \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 2. Taxis
\f1\b0 : movement with a 
\f2\i specific 
\f1\i0 direction, 
\f2\i towards 
\f1\i0 (
\f0\b positive 
\f1\b0 taxis) or 
\f2\i away 
\f1\i0 (
\f0\b negative 
\f1\b0 taxis) from a stimulus. 
\f2\i Light 
\f1\i0 stimulus = 
\f0\b phototaxis
\f1\b0 ; 
\f2\i chemical 
\f1\i0 stimulus = 
\f0\b chemotaxis. 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 3. Migration
\f1\b0 : 
\f2\i long-distance 
\f1\i0 movement from one area to another due to 
\f2\i instinct
\f1\i0 , often 
\f2\i seasonal. 
\f1\i0 \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 Communication 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 Allows 
\f0\b coordination 
\f1\b0 of social behaviors with 
\f2\i other 
\f1\i0 animals (finding shelter, food, mates, & avoiding predation). \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 1. Visual: 
\f1\b0 associated with 
\f0\b aggressive 
\f1\b0 (eg: wolves baring teeth) and 
\f0\b submissive behaviors 
\f1\b0 (eg: wolves lowering tail)
\f0\b . 
\f1\b0 Another example is 
\f0\b courtship/mating rituals
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 2. Auditory: 
\f1\b0 communication via 
\f2\i sounds
\f1\i0 . Beneficial at 
\f2\i night 
\f1\i0 and over 
\f2\i long distances
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 3. Tactile: 
\f1\b0 communication via 
\f2\i touch 
\f1\i0 (eg: wolves greeting by licking muzzles).\
\

\f0\b 4. Chemical: 
\f1\b0 communication via 
\f2\i chemicals
\f1\i0 . 
\f0\b Releaser pheromones 
\f1\b0 (
\f2\i immediate
\f1\i0 , 
\f2\i reversible 
\f1\i0 behaviors) and 
\f0\b primer pheromones 
\f1\b0 (
\f2\i long term 
\f1\i0 behaviors). \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 Social Behavior 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 Allows interaction for companionship, finding food, protection, and mating. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Cooperation
\f1\b0 : grouping together to better achieve a goal (eg: coordinated hunting). \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Agonistic behaviors: 
\f1\b0 competing for food, territory, or mates. Include: 
\f0\b threats, aggression 
\f1\b0 (often 
\f2\i detrimental 
\f1\i0 to both parties)
\f0\b , 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b submission. Appeasement behavior 
\f1\b0 (a threat by one animal causes other animal\'92s submission) 
\f2\i avoids 
\f1\i0 aggression (prevents injuries). \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Territoriality
\f1\b0 : behaviors used to protect an animal\'92s 
\f0\b territory 
\f1\b0 or safe space (eg: employing watchers and defenders and using 
\f2\i pheromones 
\f1\i0 to scare off others). \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Altruistic behaviors: 
\f1\b0 sacrifices made for 
\f2\i relatives
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f3 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0\b Inclusive fitness 
\f1\b0 = sum of animal\'92s 
\f0\b direct 
\f1\b0 (genes 
\f2\i animal 
\f1\i0 passes on) and 
\f0\b indirect 
\f1\b0 (genes passed on by 
\f2\i relatives
\f1\i0 ) fitness. 
\f2\i Increased 
\f1\i0 by 
\f2\i indirect 
\f1\i0 fitness (
\f0\b kin selection
\f1\b0 ). \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3 \cf4 \uc0\u9679  \cf0 \cb1 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \ul Hamilton's Rule of Altruism\cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone :    
\f5\b \cf0 \cb1 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 r x B > C
\f3\b0 \
\
where:\
r = genetic relatedness between altruist and relative, in proportion of shared genes\
B = benefit to the relative, in how many more offspring are produced due to the altruistic act\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 C = cost to the altruist, in how many fewer offspring are produced due to the altruistic act\

\f5\b \cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\uc0\u9679  
\f0 Reciprocal altruism
\f1\b0 : sacrifices made for other organisms in anticipation of a 
\f2\i future reward. \
\
\

\f0\i0\b\fs48 \cf2 Mating 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Sexual selection
\f1\b0 : how males and females differ in mating behavior to maximize fitness. \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f3 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f2\i Females 
\f1\i0 contribute 
\f2\i a lot 
\f1\i0 of energy in mating (maximize fitness with focus on high 
\f2\i quality 
\f1\i0 mates and offspring), while 
\f2\i males 
\f1\i0 contribute 
\f2\i little 
\f1\i0 energy (maximize fitness with focus on 
\f2\i quantity 
\f1\i0 of offspring). \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f5\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Female choice 
\f1\b0 increases 
\f2\i attractive traits 
\f1\i0 in males. \cb1 \

\f5\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Male competition 
\f1\b0 rewards 
\f2\i strongest 
\f1\i0 males with more mating opportunities. \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f3 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0\b Sexual dimorphism
\f1\b0 : 
\f2\i males and females 
\f1\i0 of same species 
\f2\i look different 
\f1\i0 (eg. males larger than females). \cb1 \
\

\f3 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0\b Monogamy 
\f1\b0 = 
\f2\i one 
\f1\i0 mating partner at once. \

\f3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0\b Polygamy 
\f1\b0 = 
\f2\i multiple 
\f1\i0 partners at once.\cb1 \

\f3 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0\b Polygyny 
\f1\b0 = 
\f2\i one 
\f1\i0 male 
\f2\i multiple 
\f1\i0 females.\cb1 \

\f3 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0\b Polyandry 
\f1\b0 = 
\f2\i one 
\f1\i0 female 
\f2\i multiple 
\f1\i0 males. \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f5\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0 Semelparity 
\f1\b0 = mate 
\f2\i once 
\f1\i0 in lifetime (
\f2\i multiple 
\f1\i0 offspring, 
\f2\i low 
\f1\i0 survival, 
\f2\i harsh 
\f1\i0 conditions, 
\f2\i no 
\f1\i0 parental care). \cb1 \

\f5\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0 Iteroparity 
\f1\b0 = mate 
\f2\i many times 
\f1\i0 in lifetime (
\f2\i one 
\f1\i0 offspring, 
\f2\i high 
\f1\i0 survival, 
\f2\i dependable 
\f1\i0 environment, 
\f2\i parental care
\f1\i0 ). \cb1 \
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\i \cf4 \cb3 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0

\f1\i0 \cf4 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb1 \
\
}