{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;
\f3\ftech\fcharset77 Symbol;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red49\green112\blue185;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c23922\c52157\c77647;
}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Heterotrophs 
\f1\b0 must get energy from the food they eat, while 
\f0\b autotrophs 
\f1\b0 can 
\f2\i make 
\f1\i0 their own food. Photoautotrophs take 
\f2\i light 
\f1\i0 energy and convert it to 
\f2\i chemical 
\f1\i0 energy using 
\f0\b photosynthesis
\f1\b0 . \

\f0\b Photosynthesis 
\f1\b0 creates chemical energy that is transferred through food-chains, reduces atmospheric carbon dioxide, and releases oxygen. \

\f0\b Photons 
\f1\b0 (light energy) are used to 
\f2\i synthesize 
\f0\i0\b sugars 
\f1\b0 (glucose) in photosynthesis. \

\f0\b Carbon fixation 
\f1\b0 is the process by which 
\f2\i inorganic 
\f1\i0 carbon (CO\dn6 2\up0 ) is converted into an 
\f2\i organic 
\f1\i0 molecule (glucose). Photosynthesis takes electrons released from 
\f0\b photolysis 
\f1\b0 (splitting water molecules) and excites them using solar energy. These excited electrons are then used to 
\f2\i power 
\f1\i0 carbon fixation. \cb1 \
\
\

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 \cb3 Photosynthesis and Cellular Respiration 
\f1\b0\fs24 \cf2 \cb1 \

\fs36 \cb3 Photosynthesis and cellular respiration are reverse processes in terms of their 
\f2\i overall 
\f1\i0 reaction.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 Photosynthesis 
\f1\b0 is 
\f2\i non-spontaneous 
\f1\i0 and 
\f2\i endergonic
\f1\i0 , producing glucose after an input of solar energy. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Cellular respiration 
\f1\b0 is 
\f2\i spontaneous 
\f1\i0 and 
\f2\i exergonic
\f1\i0 , breaking down glucose to generate energy in the form of ATP.\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 Leaf Anatomy 
\f1\b0\fs24 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 \cb3 Epidermis 
\f1\b0 - an outer layer of cells that provides protection and prevents water loss. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Palisade mesophyll cells 
\f1\b0 - right below upper epidermis, has 
\f2\i many chloroplasts 
\f1\i0 and this is where 
\f2\i most 
\f1\i0 photosynthesis occurs. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Spongy mesophyll cells 
\f1\b0 - bottom of the leaf, where the leaf has a lot of spaces for gas movement. Has 
\f2\i some chloroplasts 
\f1\i0 for moderate amounts of photosynthesis. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Stomata 
\f1\b0 - pores underneath the leaf for gas to enter and exit. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Guard cells 
\f1\b0 - surround stomata and control their opening/closing. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Chloroplasts 
\f1\b0 are 
\f2\i organelles 
\f1\i0 found in plants and photosynthetic algae but not in cyanobacteria. They are similar to 
\f2\i mitochondria 
\f1\i0 and contain the structures listed below (outermost to innermost). \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 Light Dependent Reactions of Photosynthesis 
\f1\b0\fs24 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\fs36 \cf2 \cb3 The 
\f0\b light dependent reactions 
\f1\b0 take place in the 
\f0\b thylakoid membrane 
\f1\b0 and harness 
\f2\i light 
\f1\i0 energy to produce 
\f0\b ATP 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b NADPH 
\f1\b0 (an electron carrier) 
\f2\i for later use 
\f1\i0 in the 
\f2\i Calvin cycle 
\f1\i0 (ATP generated here is 
\f2\i not 
\f1\i0 used to power the cell - it is consumed in the Calvin cycle). \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Photosystems 
\f1\b0 contain 
\f2\i special pigments 
\f1\i0 such as chlorophyll and carotenoids that absorb photons. The 
\f0\b reaction center 
\f1\b0 is a special pair of chlorophyll molecules in the 
\f2\i center 
\f1\i0 of these proteins. 
\f0\b Photosystem II (P\dn6 680\up0 ) 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b Photosystem I (P\dn6 700\up0 ) 
\f1\b0 are used in photosynthesis. \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 Non-cyclic photophosphorylation 
\f1\b0 is carried out by the light dependent reactions. Below are the important steps of this process: \cb1 \
\cb3 1.  Water is 
\f0\b split (photolysis)
\f1\b0 , passing electrons to 
\f2\i photosystem II 
\f1\i0 and releasing 
\f2\i protons 
\f1\i0 into the thylakoid lumen. \cb1 \
\cb3 2.  Photons excite electrons in the 
\f0\b reaction center 
\f1\b0 of 
\f0\b photosystem II
\f1\b0 , passing the electrons to a 
\f0\b primary electron acceptor
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\cb3 3.  The primary electron acceptor sends the excited electrons to the 
\f0\b electron transport chain (ETC)
\f1\b0 . During the redox reactions within the ETC, protons are pumped 
\f2\i from the stroma 
\f1\i0 to the 
\f0\b thylakoid lumen
\f1\b0 . The electrons are then deposited into 
\f2\i photosystem I
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \
\cb3 4.  Photons excite 
\f2\i pigments 
\f1\i0 now in 
\f0\b photosystem I
\f1\b0 , energizing the electrons in the 
\f2\i reaction center 
\f1\i0 to be passed to 
\f2\i another 
\f1\i0 primary electron acceptor. \cb1 \
\cb3 5.  The electrons are sent to a short electron transport chain that terminates with 
\f0\b NADP\up10 + \up0 reductase
\f1\b0 , an enzyme then reduces NADP\up10 + \up0 into 
\f0\b NADPH 
\f1\b0 using electrons and protons. \cb1 \
\cb3 6.  The 
\f0\b accumulation of protons 
\f1\b0 in the thylakoid lumen generates an 
\f2\i electrochemical gradient 
\f1\i0 that is used to produce 
\f0\b ATP 
\f1\b0 using an 
\f2\i ATP synthase 
\f1\i0 (
\f0\b chemiosmosis
\f1\b0 ), as H\up10 + \up0 moves from the thylakoid lumen back into the stroma. \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 Cyclic photophosphorylation 
\f1\b0 happens when 
\f0\b photosystem I 
\f1\b0 passes its electrons back to the 
\f2\i first 
\f0\i0\b ETC 
\f1\b0 instead of the second ETC. This causes more 
\f2\i proton pumping 
\f1\i0 and more 
\f2\i ATP production
\f1\i0 , while 
\f2\i no 
\f1\i0 NADPH is generated. \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 The Calvin Cycle 
\f1\b0\fs24 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\fs36 \cf2 \cb3 The 
\f0\b Calvin cycle 
\f1\b0 is also known as the 
\f0\b light independent reactions 
\f1\b0 because it does 
\f2\i not 
\f1\i0 directly use light energy, but can 
\f2\i only 
\f1\i0 occur if the light dependent reactions are providing 
\f0\b ATP 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b NADPH
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\cb3 The Calvin cycle takes place in the chloroplast 
\f0\b stroma 
\f1\b0 of plant 
\f0\b mesophyll 
\f1\b0 cells. It fixes 
\f2\i carbon dioxide 
\f1\i0 that enters 
\f0\b stomata
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 1.
\f0\b \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
  Carbon fixation - carbon dioxide combines with 
\f2\i\b0 five-carbon 
\f0\i0\b ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate (RuBP) to form 
\f2\i\b0 six-carbon 
\f0\i0\b molecules, which quickly break down into 
\f2\i\b0 three-carbon 
\f0\i0\b phosphoglycerates (PGA). This reaction is catalyzed by RuBisCo. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f1\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 2.
\f0\b \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
  Reduction - PGA is 
\f2\i\b0 phosphorylated 
\f0\i0\b by ATP and subsequently 
\f2\i\b0 reduced 
\f0\i0\b by NADPH to form glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (G3P). \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f1\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 3.
\f0\b \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
  Regeneration - Most of the G3P is converted back to RuBP. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f1\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 4.
\f0\b \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
  Carbohydrate synthesis - some of the G3P is used to make glucose. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 \
6CO\dn6 2 \up0 +18ATP+12NADPH+H\up10 + 
\f3\b0 \up0 \uc0\u8594 
\f0\b  18 ADP + 18 P\dn6 i \up0 +12 NADP\up10 + \up0 + 1 glucose \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\fs48 \cf4 \cb3 Photorespiration 
\f1\b0\fs24 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 \cb3 RuBisCo
\f1\b0 , in addition to fixing carbon dioxide into RuBP, can also cause 
\f0\b oxygen 
\f1\b0 to bind to RuBP in a process called 
\f0\b photorespiration. 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Photorespiration 
\f1\b0 occurs in the 
\f0\b stroma
\f1\b0 , producing a 
\f2\i two
\f1\i0 -carbon molecule 
\f0\b phosphoglycolate 
\f1\b0 that is shuttled to 
\f0\b peroxisomes 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b mitochondria 
\f1\b0 for conversion into 
\f0\b PGA
\f1\b0 . However, fixed carbon is lost as carbon dioxide in the process. Overall, there is a 
\f0\b net loss 
\f1\b0 of fixed carbon atoms and 
\f0\b no new glucose 
\f1\b0 would be made. \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 Also called 
\f0\b C\dn6 2 \up0 photosynthesis
\f1\b0 , since 
\f0\b two-carbon 
\f1\b0 phosphoglycolate is produced. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Hot and dry 
\f1\b0 - stomata 
\f2\i closed 
\f1\i0 to minimize water loss, oxygen accumulates inside leaf while carbon dioxide is used up. RuBisCo binds oxygen and photorespiration occurs. \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 Alternative Photosynthetic Pathways 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 C\dn6 3 \up0 photosynthesis 
\f1\b0 - 
\f2\i normal 
\f1\i0 photosynthesis, where 
\f0\b three-carbon 
\f1\b0 PGA is produced. \
\

\f0\b C\dn6 4 \up0 photosynthesis 
\f1\b0 - produces 
\f0\b four-carbon oxaloacetate
\f1\b0 , occurs in plants living in hot environments. 
\f0\b Spatial isolation 
\f1\b0 of carbon dioxide to 
\f2\i prevent 
\f1\i0 photorespiration. Below are the important steps: \cb1 \
\cb3 1. 
\f0\b PEP carboxylase 
\f1\b0 fixes CO\dn6 2 \up0 into a 
\f2\i three carbon 
\f0\i0\b PEP 
\f1\b0 molecule, producing 
\f0\b oxaloacetate
\f1\b0 , which is 
\f2\i converted 
\f1\i0 into 
\f0\b malate 
\f1\b0 in the 
\f0\b mesophyll cell
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\cb3 2. Malate is transferred to 
\f0\b bundle sheath cells
\f1\b0 , which have lower concentrations of oxygen. \cb1 \
\cb3 3. Malate is 
\f0\b decarboxylated 
\f1\b0 to 
\f2\i release 
\f1\i0 CO\dn6 2\up0 , spatially isolating where CO\dn6 2 \up0 is fixed by RuBisCo. The only drawback is that 
\f0\b pyruvate 
\f1\b0 is also produced and needs to be shuttled back to 
\f2\i mesophyll cells 
\f1\i0 using ATP energy. \cb1 \
\cb3 4. Pyruvate is converted back into 
\f0\b PEP
\f1\b0 . \
\

\f0\b CAM photosynthesis 
\f1\b0 - uses 
\f0\b temporal isolation 
\f1\b0 of carbon dioxide to 
\f2\i prevent 
\f1\i0 photorespiration in hot environments. Below are the important steps: \cb1 \
\cb3 1. During the 
\f0\b day
\f1\b0 , stomata are 
\f2\i closed 
\f1\i0 to prevent 
\f0\b transpiration 
\f1\b0 (evaporation of water from plants). \cb1 \
\cb3 2. During the 
\f0\b night
\f1\b0 , stomata are 
\f2\i open 
\f1\i0 to let carbon dioxide in. Just like in C\dn6 4 \up0 photosynthesis, 
\f0\b PEP carboxylase 
\f1\b0 fixes CO\dn6 2 \up0 into PEP, producing 
\f0\b oxaloacetate 
\f1\b0 and afterwards 
\f0\b malate
\f1\b0 . However, malate is stored in 
\f0\b vacuoles 
\f1\b0 instead of being shuttled to bundle sheath cells. \cb1 \
\cb3 3. During the 
\f0\b next day
\f1\b0 , the stomata are 
\f2\i closed 
\f1\i0 again and malate is converted back into oxaloacetate, which releases 
\f0\b CO\dn6 2 
\f1\b0 \up0 and 
\f0\b PEP
\f1\b0 . Thus, CO\dn6 2 \up0 accumulates in the leaf for use in the Calvin cycle through 
\f2\i temporal isolation
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \
\
\
\
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
}