{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial-BoldMT;
\f3\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red49\green112\blue185;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c23922\c52157\c77647;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;
}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Key Terms 
\f1\b0\fs24 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f2\b\fs36 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Genome 
\f1\b0 - all the DNA in a cell. \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Chromosomes 
\f1\b0 - separate DNA molecules that make up the entire genome. \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Homologous chromosome pairs 
\f1\b0 - two 
\f3\i different versions 
\f1\i0 of the same chromosome number. One from mother and one from father. \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Sister chromatids 
\f1\b0 - 
\f3\i identical, attached 
\f1\i0 copies of a single chromosome, forming dyads. \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Dyads 
\f1\b0 - replicated chromosomes containing two sister chromatids that look like an \'93X\'94. \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Centromeres 
\f1\b0 - regions of DNA that 
\f3\i connect 
\f1\i0 sister chromatids in a dyad. \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Kinetochores 
\f1\b0 - proteins on the sides of centromeres that help microtubules pull sister chromatids apart during cell division. \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Karyokinesis 
\f1\b0 - division of the nucleus. \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Cytokinesis 
\f1\b0 - physical division of the cytoplasm and cell membrane. \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Parent cell
\f1\b0 - one parent cell produces two 
\f0\b daughter cells 
\f1\b0 after division. \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Ploidy 
\f1\b0 - describes the number of chromosome sets found in the body. Humans are 
\f0\b diploid 
\f1\b0 because they contain 
\f3\i two 
\f1\i0 sets of chromosomes (46 chromosomes, 23 pairs), one from each parent. However, they also have 
\f0\b haploid 
\f1\b0 cells (gametes) that only contain 
\f3\i one 
\f1\i0 chromosome set (23 chromosomes). \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Sex chromosomes 
\f1\b0 - one pair in the human body and determine sex. \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Autosomes 
\f1\b0 - 22 pairs in the human body and are nonsex chromosomes. \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Gametes 
\f1\b0 - haploid cells (sperm and eggs). \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Germ cells 
\f1\b0 - diploid cells that divide by meiosis to produce gametes. \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Gametocyte 
\f1\b0 - eukaryotic germ cells that can either divide to form more gametocytes or produce gametes. \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Somatic cells 
\f1\b0 - body cells excluding the gametes. Diploid in humans. \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 The Cell Cycle 
\f1\b0\fs24 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\fs36 \cf4 \cb3 The 
\f0\b cell cycle 
\f1\b0 is divided into 
\f0\b interphase 
\f1\b0 (
\f0\b G\cf4 \cb3 \dn6 1\cf4 \cb3 \up0 , G\cf4 \cb3 \dn6 0\cf4 \cb3 \up0 , S, 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b G\cf4 \cb3 \dn6 2\cf4 \cb3 \up0 ) 
\f1\b0 and the 
\f0\b M phase
\f1\b0 . 90% of the cell cycle happens during interphase. M phase is where 
\f0\b karyokinesis 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b cytokinesis 
\f1\b0 occur. \
\
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 Components of Interphase 
\f1\b0\fs24 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\fs36 \cf4 \cb3 1. 
\f0\b Gap phase 1 (G\cf4 \cb3 \dn6 1\cf4 \cb3 \up0 ) 
\f1\b0 - cell grows in preparation for cell division. Also checks for 
\f3\i favorable conditions
\f1\i0 . If favorable, cell will enter S phase. If unfavorable, cell will enter G\cf4 \cb3 \dn6 0 \cf4 \cb3 \up0 phase
\f0\b  
\f1\b0 - cells still carry out their functions but 
\f3\i halt 
\f1\i0 in the cell cycle. Cells that do 
\f3\i not 
\f1\i0 divide are stuck here. \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 2. 
\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Synthesis phase (S) 
\f1\b0 - cell replicates its 
\f3\i genome 
\f1\i0 here and moves to G\cf4 \cb3 \dn6 2 \cf4 \cb3 \up0 phase when completed. Centrosome also duplicates. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 3.
\f0\b \cf4 \cb3  \cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Gap phase 2 (G\dn6 2\up0 ) 
\f1\b0 - cell continues to grow and prepare for cell division by checking DNA for any 
\f3\i errors 
\f1\i0 after replication. Also checks for 
\f0\b mitosis promoting factor (MPF)
\f1\b0 , which needs to be in adequate amounts for cell cycle continuation. 
\f3\i Organelles 
\f1\i0 are replicated here. \
\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 Microtubule Organizing Centers 
\f1\b0\fs24 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf4 \cb3 Microtubule Organizing Centers (MTOCs) 
\f1\b0 are present in eukaryotic cells and 
\f3\i organize 
\f1\i0 microtubule extension, which are made of the protein 
\f0\b tubulin
\f1\b0 . Specifically, they are responsible for forming the 
\f0\b spindle apparatus
\f1\b0 , which guides chromosomes during 
\f3\i karyokinesis
\f1\i0 . \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Centrosomes 
\f1\b0 are organelles 
\f3\i found in animal cells 
\f1\i0 containing a pair of 
\f0\b centrioles
\f1\b0 . They act as 
\f0\b microtubule organizing centers (MTOCs)
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\cb3 Microtubules in the 
\f0\b spindle apparatus
\f1\b0 : \cb1 \
\cb3 1. 
\f0\b Kinetochore microtubules 
\f1\b0 - extend from centrosomes and attach to kinetochores on chromosomes. \cb1 \
\cb3 2. 
\f0\b Astral microtubules 
\f1\b0 - extend from centrosomes to cell membrane to orient the spindle apparatus. \cb1 \
\cb3 3. 
\f0\b Polar microtubules 
\f1\b0 - extend from the two centrosomes and connect with each other. Pushes centrosomes to opposite ends of the cell. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 \
Centrioles 
\f1\b0 are hollow cylinders made of nine triplets of microtubules (
\f0\b 9x3 array
\f1\b0 ). 
\f0\b Centrosomes 
\f1\b0 are located near the 
\f3\i nucleus 
\f1\i0 and contain a 
\f0\b pair of centrioles 
\f1\b0 oriented at 90 degree angles to one-another (attached to each other by 
\f0\b interconnecting fibers
\f1\b0 ). They replicate during the 
\f0\b S phase 
\f1\b0 of the cell cycle so that each 
\f3\i daughter cell 
\f1\i0 after cell division has 
\f0\b one 
\f1\b0 centrosome. \cb1 \
\
\cb3 The 
\f0\b pericentriolar material 
\f1\b0 surrounds the centrioles and is responsible for 
\f0\b microtubules nucleation 
\f1\b0 (
\f3\i anchoring 
\f1\i0 tubulin to start microtubule extension). \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Cilia and flagella 
\f1\b0 have nine 
\f3\i doublets 
\f1\i0 of microtubules with 
\f3\i two singles in the center 
\f1\i0 (
\f0\b 9+2 array
\f1\b0 ). They are produced by a 
\f0\b basal body
\f1\b0 , which is initially formed by the 
\f0\b mother centriole 
\f1\b0 (older centriole after 
\f3\i S phase replication
\f1\i0 ) attaching itself to the cell membrane. \
\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 Components of the M phase 
\f1\b0\fs24 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\fs36 \cf4 \cb3 The 
\f0\b M-phase 
\f1\b0 is the stage in the cell cycle where karyokinesis and cytokinesis occurs. 
\f0\b Mitosis 
\f1\b0 is a type of 
\f3\i karyokinesis 
\f1\i0 (nuclear division) that involves a diploid parent cell dividing into 
\f3\i two 
\f1\i0 diploid daughter cells. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Four phases of mitosis: 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	1.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Prophase 
\f1\b0 - 
\f0\b chromatin 
\f3\i\b0 condenses 
\f1\i0 into 
\f0\b chromosomes 
\f1\b0 (X-shaped dyad
\f0\b s
\f1\b0 ). The 
\f0\b nucleolus 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b nuclear envelope 
\f3\i\b0 disappear
\f1\i0 . 
\f0\b Spindle apparatus 
\f1\b0 forms. \cb1 \
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b \cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	2.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Metaphase 
\f1\b0 - the 
\f0\b spindle apparatus 
\f3\i\b0 guides 
\f1\i0 the chromosomes to the 
\f0\b metaphase plate 
\f1\b0 (midpoint of cell) in single file. \cb1 \
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b \cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	3.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Anaphase 
\f1\b0 - 
\f0\b kinetochore microtubules 
\f3\i\b0 shorten 
\f1\i0 to pull sister chromatids apart. Now, the sister chromatids are considered 
\f0\b separate 
\f1\b0 chromosomes. Chromosome number 
\f0\b doubles
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b \cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	4.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Telophase 
\f1\b0 - chromosomes have segregated and 
\f0\b nuclear membranes reform
\f1\b0 . In addition, 
\f0\b nucleoli 
\f1\b0 reappear and 
\f0\b chromosomes decondense 
\f1\b0 into 
\f0\b chromatin
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Cytokinesis 
\f1\b0 is the 
\f3\i physical 
\f1\i0 separation of the cytoplasm and cell membrane into two daughter cells. \cb1 \
\cb3 In 
\f0\b animal cells
\f1\b0 , cytokinesis begins in 
\f3\i late anaphase 
\f1\i0 with the formation of a 
\f0\b cleavage furrow
\f1\b0 . The cleavage furrow is a 
\f0\b contractile ring 
\f1\b0 of 
\f3\i actin microfilaments and myosin 
\f1\i0 motors that pinches the cell into two. \cb1 \
\cb3 In 
\f0\b plant cells
\f1\b0 , cytokinesis begins in 
\f3\i telophase 
\f1\i0 with the formation of a 
\f0\b cell plate
\f1\b0 . The cell plate is created by 
\f3\i vesicles 
\f1\i0 from the Golgi apparatus and ends up producing the 
\f0\b middle lamella 
\f1\b0 (cements plant cells together). \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 Cell Cycle Regulation 
\f1\b0\fs24 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\fs36 \cf4 \cb3 The 
\f0\b cell cycle 
\f1\b0 influences cell division through 
\f3\i limitations 
\f1\i0 to growth and 
\f3\i regulations 
\f1\i0 to prevent 
\f0\b cancerous growth
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Functional limitations: 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f2\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Surface to volume ratio (S/V) 
\f1\b0 - cell division occurs when 
\f0\b volume 
\f1\b0 is 
\f3\i too large 
\f1\i0 because cells rely on the 
\f0\b surface area 
\f1\b0 of their cell membrane for 
\f3\i transport 
\f1\i0 of material. 
\f3\i Decrease 
\f1\i0 in S/V leads to division. \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Genome to volume ratio (G/V) 
\f1\b0 - cell division occurs when 
\f0\b volume 
\f1\b0 is 
\f3\i too large 
\f1\i0 for cells to support with its 
\f3\i limited 
\f0\i0\b genome
\f1\b0 . 
\f3\i Decrease 
\f1\i0 in G/V leads to division. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Cell specific regulations: 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f2\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Cell specific checkpoints 
\f1\b0 - 
\f0\b G\cf4 \cb3 \dn6 1 \cf4 \cb3 \up0 restriction point 
\f1\b0 (checks for 
\f3\i favorable 
\f1\i0 conditions to grow, enters G\cf4 \cb3 \dn6 0 \cf4 \cb3 \up0 phase if 
\f3\i unfavorable
\f1\i0 ), and 
\f0\b end of G\cf4 \cb3 \dn6 2 
\f1\b0 \cf4 \cb3 \up0 (checks accuracy of DNA replication and MPF levels), and 
\f0\b M checkpoint 
\f1\b0 (during metaphase, checks for chromosomal attachment to spindle fibers). \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) 
\f1\b0 - 
\f3\i phosphorylate 
\f1\i0 certain substrates to signal cell cycle progression. Activated by 
\f0\b cyclin
\f1\b0 , a protein that 
\f3\i cycles 
\f1\i0 through stages of 
\f3\i synthesis 
\f1\i0 and 
\f3\i degradation
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Growth factors 
\f1\b0 - bind to 
\f3\i receptors 
\f1\i0 in the plasma membrane to signal for cell division. \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Density dependent inhibition 
\f1\b0 - 
\f3\i halting 
\f1\i0 cell division when density of cells is high. \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Anchorage dependence 
\f1\b0 - dividing only when 
\f3\i attached 
\f1\i0 to an external surface. \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 Binary Fission 
\f1\b0\fs24 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf4 \cb3 Mitosis 
\f1\b0 is used to 
\f3\i increase 
\f1\i0 the number of cells in an organism, whereas 
\f0\b binary fission 
\f1\b0 is used by archaea, bacteria, and certain organelles to 
\f3\i reproduce
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 During 
\f0\b binary fission
\f1\b0 , organisms will replicate their genome 
\f3\i while 
\f1\i0 cell division is happening (no S phase for DNA replication). Also, there is 
\f3\i no spindle apparatus
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
}