{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;
\f3\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f4\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f5\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial-BoldMT;
\f6\ftech\fcharset77 Symbol;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red49\green112\blue185;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue255;\red49\green113\blue186;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c23922\c52157\c77647;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;
\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c99985;\cssrgb\c24138\c52416\c77876;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Organelles 
\f1\b0\fs24 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf4 \cb3 Organelles 
\f1\b0 are cellular 
\f2\i compartments 
\f1\i0 enclosed by phospholipid bilayers (membrane bound). They are located within the 
\f0\b cytosol 
\f1\b0 (aqueous intracellular fluid) and together make up the 
\f0\b cytoplasm 
\f1\b0 (cytosol + organelles). \cb1 \
\cb3 Only 
\f0\b eukaryotic 
\f1\b0 cells contain membrane bound 
\f2\i organelles
\f1\i0 . 
\f0\b Prokaryotes 
\f1\b0 do 
\f2\i not
\f1\i0 , but they have other adaptations such as keeping their genetic material in a region called the 
\f0\b nucleoid 
\f1\b0 (more on this in later chapters). \cb1 \
\cb3 The 
\f0\b nucleus 
\f1\b0 primarily functions to 
\f2\i protect 
\f1\i0 and 
\f2\i house 
\f1\i0 DNA. 
\f0\b DNA replication 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b transcription 
\f1\b0 (DNA 
\f3 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 mRNA) occurs here. \

\f0\b Parts of the nucleus: 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f4 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f1 The 
\f0\b nucleoplasm 
\f1\b0 is the 
\f2\i cytoplasm 
\f1\i0 of the nucleus. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f1 The 
\f0\b nuclear envelope 
\f1\b0 is the 
\f2\i membrane 
\f1\i0 of the nucleus. It contains 
\f0\b two 
\f1\b0 phospholipid 
\f2\i bi
\f1\i0 layers (one inner, one outer) with a 
\f0\b perinuclear space 
\f1\b0 in the middle. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0\b Nuclear pores 
\f1\b0 are holes in the 
\f2\i nuclear envelope 
\f1\i0 that allow molecules to travel in and out of the nucleus. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f1 The 
\f0\b nuclear lamina 
\f1\b0 provides structural support to the nucleus, as well as regulating DNA and cell division. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f1 The 
\f0\b nucleolus 
\f1\b0 is a dense area that is responsible for making 
\f0\b rRNA, 
\f1\b0 and producing 
\f0\b ribosomal subunits 
\f1\b0 (rRNA + proteins). \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 Ribosomes 
\f1\b0 are 
\f2\i not 
\f1\i0 organelles but work as small factories that carry out 
\f0\b translation 
\f1\b0 (mRNA 
\f3 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 protein). They are composed of ribosomal subunits. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 
\f2\i \cb3 Eukaryotic 
\f1\i0 ribosomal subunits (
\f0\b 60S 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b 40S
\f1\b0 ) assemble in the 
\f2\i nucleoplasm 
\f1\i0 and form the complete ribosome in the 
\f2\i cytosol 
\f1\i0 (
\f0\b 80S
\f1\b0 ). \cb1 \uc0\u8232 
\f2\i \cb3 Prokaryotic 
\f1\i0 ribosomal subunits (
\f0\b 50S 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b 30S
\f1\b0 ) assemble in the 
\f2\i nucleoid 
\f1\i0 and form the complete ribosome in the 
\f2\i cytosol 
\f1\i0 (
\f0\b 70S
\f1\b0 ). \cb1 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\b \cb3 \
Free-floating 
\f1\b0 ribosomes make proteins that function in the 
\f2\i cytosol 
\f1\i0 while ribosomes embedded in the 
\f0\b rough endoplasmic reticulum (rough ER) 
\f1\b0 make proteins that are sent 
\f2\i out 
\f1\i0 of the cell or 
\f2\i to 
\f1\i0 the cell 
\f2\i membrane
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \
\
\cb3 The 
\f0\b rough endoplasmic reticulum (rough ER) 
\f1\b0 is continuous with the 
\f2\i outer 
\f1\i0 membrane of the 
\f0\b nuclear envelope 
\f1\b0 and is \'93
\f2\i rough
\f1\i0 \'94 because it is embedded with ribosomes. Proteins synthesized by the embedded ribosomes are sent into the 
\f0\b lumen 
\f1\b0 (inside of the rough ER) for modifications (eg. 
\f2\i glycosylation
\f1\i0 ). Afterwards, they are either sent 
\f2\i out 
\f1\i0 of the cell or become part of the 
\f2\i cell membrane
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 The 
\f0\b smooth endoplasmic reticulum (smooth ER) 
\f1\b0 is 
\f2\i not 
\f1\i0 continuous with other membranes. Its main function is to synthesize lipids, produce steroid hormones, and detoxify cells. \cb1 \
\
\cb3 The 
\f0\b Golgi apparatus 
\f1\b0 is made up of 
\f0\b cisternae 
\f1\b0 (flattened sacs) that 
\f2\i modify 
\f1\i0 and 
\f2\i package 
\f1\i0 substances. Vesicles come from the 
\f2\i ER 
\f1\i0 and reach the 
\f0\b cis face 
\f1\b0 (side closest to ER) of the Golgi apparatus. Vesicles leave the Golgi apparatus from the 
\f0\b trans face 
\f1\b0 (side closest to cell membrane). \cb1 \
\pard\tx5081\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Lysosomes 
\f1\b0 are membrane-bound organelles that break down substances (
\f0\b hydrolysis
\f1\b0 ) taken in through 
\f2\i endocytosis
\f1\i0 . Lysosomes contain 
\f0\b acidic digestive enzymes 
\f1\b0 that function at a 
\f2\i low pH
\f1\i0 . They also carry out 
\f0\b autophagy 
\f1\b0 (the breakdown of the cell\'92s own machinery for recycling) and 
\f0\b apoptosis 
\f1\b0 (programmed cell death).\
\

\f0\b Vacuoles: 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f5\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Transport vacuoles 
\f1\b0 - transport materials between 
\f2\i organelles
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f5\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Food vacuoles 
\f1\b0 - temporarily hold 
\f2\i endocytosed 
\f1\i0 food and later 
\f2\i fuse 
\f1\i0 with lysosomes. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f5\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Central vacuoles 
\f1\b0 - very large in plants and have a specialized membrane called the 
\f0\b tonoplast 
\f1\b0 (helps maintain cell rigidity by exerting 
\f2\i turgor
\f1\i0 ). Function in storage and material breakdown). \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f5\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Storage vacuoles 
\f1\b0 - store starches, pigments, and toxic substances. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f5\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Contractile vacuoles 
\f1\b0 - found in single-celled organisms and works to actively pump out 
\f2\i excess water
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 The 
\f0\b endomembrane system 
\f1\b0 is a 
\f2\i group of organelles 
\f1\i0 and 
\f2\i membranes 
\f1\i0 that work together to 
\f0\b modify, package
\f1\b0 , and 
\f0\b transport 
\f1\b0 proteins and lipids that are entering or exiting a cell. It includes the nucleus, rough and smooth ERs, Golgi apparatus, lysosomes, vacuoles, and cell membrane. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\b \cb3 \
Peroxisomes 
\f1\b0 perform 
\f2\i hydrolysis, 
\f1\i0 and break down stored fatty acids and help with 
\f0\b detoxification
\f1\b0 . These processes generate 
\f2\i hydrogen peroxide
\f1\i0 , which is toxic since it can produce 
\f0\b reactive oxygen species (ROS)
\f1\b0 . ROS damage cells through 
\f0\b free radicals
\f1\b0 . Peroxisomes contain an enzyme called 
\f0\b catalase, 
\f1\b0 which quickly breaks down this hydrogen peroxide into water and oxygen. \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 Mitochondria 
\f1\b0 are the powerhouses of the cell, producing 
\f2\i ATP 
\f1\i0 for energy use through 
\f2\i cellular respiration.
\f1\i0 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Chloroplasts 
\f1\b0 are found in plants and some protists.They carry out 
\f2\i photosynthesis.
\f1\i0 \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Centrosomes 
\f1\b0 are organelles found in animal cells containing a pair of 
\f0\b centrioles
\f1\b0 . They act as 
\f0\b microtubule organizing centers (MTOCs) 
\f1\b0 during 
\f2\i cell division.
\f1\i0 \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 Cytoskeleton 
\f1\b0\fs24 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\fs36 \cf4 \cb5 The 
\f0\b cytoskeleton 
\f1\b0 provides structure and function within the cytoplasm.\cf6 \cb3  \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Microfilaments 
\f1\b0 are the smallest, and are composed of a 
\f2\i double helix 
\f1\i0 of 
\f2\i two 
\f0\i0\b actin filaments
\f1\b0 . They are mainly involved in 
\f0\b cell movement 
\f1\b0 and can quickly assemble, and disassemble. Below are some of their functions: \cb1 \
\cb3 1. 
\f0\b Cyclosis (cytoplasmic streaming) 
\f1\b0 - \'91stirring of the cytoplasm\'92; organelles and vesicles travel on microfilament \'93
\f2\i tracks
\f1\i0 \'94. \cb1 \
\cb3 2. 
\f0\b Cleavage furrow 
\f1\b0 - during cell division, actin microfilaments form 
\f2\i contractile rings 
\f1\i0 that split the cell. \cb1 \
\cb3 3. 
\f0\b Muscle contraction 
\f1\b0 - actin microfilaments have 
\f2\i directionality
\f1\i0 , allowing 
\f0\b myosin motor proteins 
\f1\b0 to pull on them for muscle contraction. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 \
Intermediate filaments 
\f1\b0 are 
\f2\i between 
\f1\i0 microfilaments and microtubules in size. They are more stable than microfilaments and mainly help with 
\f0\b structural support
\f1\b0 . For example, 
\f0\b keratin 
\f1\b0 is an important intermediate filament protein in skin, hair, and nails. 
\f0\b Lamins 
\f1\b0 are a type of intermediate filament which helps make up the 
\f0\b nuclear lamina
\f1\b0 , a network of fibrous intermediate filaments which support the nucleus. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 \
Microtubules 
\f1\b0 are the 
\f2\i largest 
\f1\i0 in size and give 
\f0\b structural integrity 
\f1\b0 to cells. They are hollow and have walls made of 
\f0\b tubulin protein dimers
\f1\b0 . Microtubules also have functions in cell division, cilia, and flagella. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 \
Microtubule Organizing Centers (MTOCs) 
\f1\b0 are present in eukaryotic cells and 
\f2\i organize 
\f1\i0 microtubule extension. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Centrioles 
\f1\b0 are hollow cylinders made of nine triplets of microtubules (
\f0\b 9x3 array
\f1\b0 ). 
\f0\b Centrosomes 
\f1\b0 contain a pair of centrioles oriented at 90 degree angles to one-another. They replicate during the 
\f0\b S phase 
\f1\b0 of the cell cycle so that each 
\f2\i daughter cell 
\f1\i0 after cell division has 
\f0\b one 
\f1\b0 centrosome. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Cilia and flagella 
\f1\b0 have nine doublets of microtubules with two singles in the center (
\f0\b 9+2 array
\f1\b0 ). They are produced by a 
\f0\b basal body
\f1\b0 , which is initially formed by the 
\f0\b mother centriole 
\f1\b0 (older centriole after 
\f2\i S phase replication
\f1\i0 ).\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 Extracellular Matrix 
\f1\b0\fs24 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\fs36 \cf4 \cb3 The 
\f0\b extracellular matrix (ECM) 
\f1\b0 provides 
\f2\i mechanical support between 
\f1\i0 cells. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 ECM components: 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f5\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Proteoglycan 
\f1\b0 - type of 
\f2\i glycoprotein 
\f1\i0 that have a 
\f2\i high 
\f1\i0 proportion of carbohydrates. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f5\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Collagen 
\f1\b0 - most common 
\f2\i structural protein 
\f1\i0 and organized into 
\f0\b collagen fibrils 
\f1\b0 (fibers of 
\f2\i glycosylated 
\f1\i0 collagen secreted by 
\f2\i fibroblasts
\f1\i0 ). \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f5\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Integrin 
\f1\b0 - 
\f2\i transmembrane protein 
\f1\i0 that facilitates 
\f0\b ECM adhesion 
\f1\b0 and 
\f2\i signals 
\f1\i0 to cells how to respond to the extracellular environment (growth, apoptosis, etc.). \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f5\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Fibronectin 
\f1\b0 - 
\f2\i protein 
\f1\i0 that connects integrin to ECM and helps with 
\f2\i signal transduction
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f5\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Laminin 
\f1\b0 - behaves similarly to fibronectin. They influence cell differentiation, adhesion, and movement. It is a major component of the 
\f0\b basal lamina 
\f1\b0 (a layer of the ECM secreted by 
\f2\i epithelial 
\f1\i0 cells). \cb1 \
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Cell walls 
\f1\b0 are 
\f2\i carbohydrate-based 
\f1\i0 structures that act like a 
\f0\b substitute ECM 
\f1\b0 because they provide structural support to cells that either do 
\f2\i not 
\f1\i0 have, or have a minimal ECM. They are present in plants (
\f0\b cellulose
\f1\b0 ), fungi (
\f0\b chitin
\f1\b0 ), bacteria (
\f0\b peptidoglycan
\f1\b0 ), and archaea. \
The 
\f0\b glycocalyx 
\f1\b0 is a glycolipid/glycoprotein coat found mainly on bacterial and animal epithelial cells. Helps with 
\f2\i adhesion
\f1\i0 , 
\f2\i protection
\f1\i0 , and 
\f2\i cell recognition
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Cell-matrix junctions (connect ECM 
\f6\b0 \uc0\u8594 
\f0\b  cytoskeleton): 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\cb3 1. 
\f0\b Focal adhesions 
\f1\b0 - ECM connects via integrins to 
\f2\i actin microfilaments 
\f1\i0 inside the cell. \cb1 \
\cb3 2. 
\f0\b Hemidesmosomes 
\f1\b0 - ECM connects via integrins to 
\f2\i intermediate filaments 
\f1\i0 inside the cell. \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Cell-cell junctions (connect adjacent cells): 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\cb3 1. 
\f0\b Tight junctions 
\f1\b0 - form water-tight 
\f0\b seals 
\f1\b0 between cells to ensure substances pass 
\f2\i through 
\f1\i0 cells and not between them. \cb1 \
\cb3 2. 
\f0\b Desmosomes 
\f1\b0 - provide support against 
\f2\i mechanical stress
\f1\i0 . Connects neighboring cells via i
\f2\i ntermediate filaments
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \
\cb3 3. 
\f0\b Adherens junctions 
\f1\b0 - similar in structure and function to desmosomes, but connects neighboring cells via 
\f2\i actin microfilaments
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \
\cb3 4. 
\f0\b Gap junctions 
\f1\b0 - allow passage of 
\f2\i ions and small molecules 
\f1\i0 between cells. \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 Plant cells contain a few unique cell junctions: \cb1 \
\cb3 1. 
\f0\b Middle lamella 
\f1\b0 - sticky cement similar in function to 
\f2\i tight junctions
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \
\cb3 2. 
\f0\b Plasmodesmata 
\f1\b0 - tunnels with tubes between plant cells. Allows cytosol fluids to freely travel between plant cells. \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 \
\cb1 \
}