{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial-BoldMT;
\f3\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;\f4\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red49\green112\blue185;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c23922\c52157\c77647;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;
}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Ecosystem Ecology 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f2\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Food chain
\f1\b0 : 
\f3\i linear depiction 
\f1\i0 of what eats what (eg. carrot 
\f4 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 \cf4 \cb3 rabbit 
\f4 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 \cf4 \cb3 fox 
\f4 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 \cf4 \cb3 lion). \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Food web
\f1\b0 : 
\f3\i expanded 
\f1\i0 food chain depicting interconnections between food chains. \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Trophic level
\f1\b0 : an organism\'92s position within a food chain or food web. \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Autotroph
\f1\b0 : produces organic compounds from abiotic factors (sunlight, water, CO\cf4 \cb3 \dn6 2\cf4 \cb3 \up0 , etc.) \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Heterotroph
\f1\b0 : must ingest organic compounds to generate energy & survive. \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Predation
\f1\b0 : relationship between 
\f0\b predator 
\f1\b0 (hunter) and 
\f0\b prey 
\f1\b0 (hunted - plant or animal). \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Herbivore
\f1\b0 : plant eater. \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Carnivore
\f1\b0 : meat eater. \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Omnivore
\f1\b0 : plant and meat eater. \cb1 \
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Primary producers, 
\f1\b0 at the 
\f3\i lowest trophic level
\f1\i0 , are 
\f3\i autotrophs 
\f1\i0 undergoing energy production (eg. photosynthesis) to 
\f3\i generate the biomass of an ecosystem
\f1\i0 . 
\f0\b Consumers 
\f1\b0 (higher trophic levels) eat 
\f3\i producers 
\f1\i0 or 
\f3\i other consumers
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 Primary consumers 
\f1\b0 (often herbivores) are just above producers. 
\f0\b Secondary consumers 
\f1\b0 (carnivores) prey on primary consumers and 
\f0\b tertiary consumers 
\f1\b0 prey on secondary consumers. An 
\f0\b apex predator 
\f1\b0 is at the top of the chain (tertiary consumer or higher). Only 
\f0\b ~10% of energy 
\f1\b0 stored in a trophic level is converted to organic tissue in the next trophic level as energy transfer is 
\f3\i inefficient 
\f1\i0 between trophic levels.\
\

\f0\b Scavengers 
\f1\b0 (carnivores or herbivores) 
\f3\i decompose 
\f1\i0 other 
\f3\i dead animals 
\f1\i0 (or plants). eg. vultures, some beetles. 
\f0\b Saprophytes 
\f1\b0 (plants, fungi, microorganisms) are 
\f0\b decomposers 
\f1\b0 that consume 
\f3\i dead or decaying 
\f1\i0 organic material, and work with scavengers in 
\f3\i organic recycling
\f1\i0 . 
\f0\b Fungi 
\f1\b0 (most important decomposers) and some 
\f0\b bacteria 
\f1\b0 decompose organisms, forming 
\f0\b detritus 
\f1\b0 (feces and decomposing matter). 
\f0\b Detritivores 
\f1\b0 (
\f0\b worms and slugs
\f1\b0 ), 
\f3\i consume detritus, 
\f1\i0 exposing more organic material for decomposers. \cb1 \
\
}