{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;
\f3\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f4\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial-BoldMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red49\green112\blue185;
\red49\green113\blue186;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c23922\c52157\c77647;
\cssrgb\c24138\c52416\c77876;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Respiration
\f1\b0 : the exchange of gases between the outside environment and the inside of an organism. \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 \cb3 Respiration in Plants 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \cb3 Autotrophs 
\f1\b0 produce their own food through 
\f0\b photosynthesis
\f1\b0 , releasing oxygen and making carbohydrates. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Cellular respiration 
\f1\b0 is also performed by plants after photosynthesis, using up oxygen and carbohydrates to produce energy. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Stomata 
\f1\b0 (in leaves and green stems) and 
\f0\b lenticels 
\f1\b0 (in woody stems) are pores found in plants that allow gas exchange to occur. \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 \cb3 Respiration in Animals
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 1.
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 
\f0\b Cnidaria 
\f1\b0 are small invertebrates that use simple diffusion for respiration due to the lack of a circulatory system. Almost all cells must be in direct contact with the environment. Environment must be moist for diffusion to happen. \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 2.
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 
\f0\b Annelida 
\f1\b0 includes earthworms that also use simple diffusion for respiration but have a closed circulatory system. They use a slimy 
\f2\i mucus 
\f1\i0 to facilitate the transport of oxygen into their closed circulatory system. \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 3.
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 
\f0\b Arthropoda 
\f1\b0 are invertebrates such as insects and crustaceans that have an open circulatory system with 
\f0\b hemolymph
\f1\b0 , a fluid similar to blood. Gas exchange happens mainly through the 
\f0\b tracheal system 
\f1\b0 for insects and the 
\f0\b book lungs 
\f1\b0 for arachnids, not the hemolymph. \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 4
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. 
\f0\b Fish 
\f1\b0 are a part of the phylum Chordata and have a closed circulatory system with blood to transport gas. Fish have gills with a large surface area for gas exchange and use 
\f0\b countercurrent exchange 
\f1\b0 to efficiently absorb oxygen and remove carbon dioxide from their blood. \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 \cb3 Human Lungs 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \cb3 Lungs 
\f1\b0 are located in the thoracic cavity and covered by the rib cage.\

\f0\b \cf0 \cb1 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 1.
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 
\f0\b Inspiration 
\f1\b0 or 
\f0\b inhalation 
\f1\b0 involves the contraction of the 
\f0\b diaphragm 
\f1\b0 (pulls lungs downwards) and the 
\f0\b external intercostal muscles 
\f1\b0 (expands the rib cage). These contractions cause the pressure of the intrapleural space to 
\f2\i decrease 
\f1\i0 and the volume of the lungs to 
\f2\i increase, 
\f1\i0 bringing air into the lungs. \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 2.
\f1\b0 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 
\f0\b \cb3 Expiration 
\f1\b0 or 
\f0\b exhalation 
\f1\b0 involves the relaxation of the diaphragm and the external intercostal muscles, bringing\cb1  \cb3 the lungs back up and closing up the rib cage through 
\f0\b elastic recoil
\f1\b0 . This causes the pressure of the intrapleural space to 
\f2\i increase 
\f1\i0 and the volume of the lungs to 
\f2\i decrease
\f1\i0 , driving air out of the lungs. The 
\f0\b internal intercostal muscles 
\f1\b0 can also contract during a more forced expiration, closing the rib cage even more. \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 Lung Volumes 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Tidal volume 
\f1\b0 is the volume of air that moves through the lungs between a normal inhalation and exhalation. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Inspiratory reserve volume 
\f1\b0 is the maximum volume of air that can be inhaled further after a normal inhalation is already taken in. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Expiratory reserve volume 
\f1\b0 is the maximum volume of air that can be exhaled further after a normal exhalation is already released. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Residual volume 
\f1\b0 is the minimum amount of air that needs to be present in the lungs to prevent collapse. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Functional residual capacity 
\f1\b0 is the entire volume of air still present in the lungs after a normal exhalation. It is also the sum of the expiratory reserve volume and the residual volume. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Vital capacity 
\f1\b0 is the maximum amount of air that can be exhaled after a maximum inhalation. It is the sum of the inspiratory reserve volume, tidal volume, and expiratory reserve volume. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Total lung capacity 
\f1\b0 is the sum of the vital capacity and the residual volume: it is that maximum volume the lungs could possibly hold at any given time.\
\

\f0\b Pathways of Air 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 1.
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 The 
\f0\b nasal cavity 
\f1\b0 contains 
\f0\b goblet cells 
\f1\b0 (secrete mucus) and 
\f0\b ciliated epithelial cells 
\f1\b0 (move mucus and trapped debris) that work in tandem with each other. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 2.
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 The 
\f0\b pharynx 
\f1\b0 is at the beginning of the throat after the nasal cavity. Under the control of the 
\f0\b epiglottis
\f1\b0 , it diverts air and food into the larynx and the esophagus. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 3
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. The 
\f0\b larynx 
\f1\b0 receives air and contains the voice box. The 
\f0\b upper respiratory tract 
\f1\b0 refers to the nasal cavity, pharynx, and larynx. On the other hand, the 
\f0\b esophagus 
\f1\b0 receives food and connects to the stomach. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 4.
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 The 
\f0\b trachea 
\f1\b0 is below the larynx and has reinforced cartilage along with ciliated epithelial cells to filter air. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 5.
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 Next are the two main left and right 
\f0\b bronchi
\f1\b0 , which end up branching into smaller 
\f0\b bronchioles 
\f1\b0 and eventually into 
\f0\b alveoli
\f1\b0 . The 
\f0\b lower respiratory tract 
\f1\b0 refers to the trachea, bronchi, bronchioles, and alveoli. Alveoli contain 
\f2\i type 1 
\f1\i0 epithelial cells (structural support) and 
\f2\i type 2 
\f1\i0 epithelial cells (produce surfactant). 
\f0\b Surfactant 
\f1\b0 is a substance that prevent the lungs from collapsing by reducing surface tension. \cb1 \
\
\cb3 Differences in 
\f0\b partial pressure 
\f1\b0 allow gases to flow from areas of high pressure to low pressure through 
\f2\i simple diffusion
\f1\i0 . This is required for 
\f0\b external respiration 
\f1\b0 (gas exchange between inspired air and lung alveolar capillaries) and 
\f0\b internal respiration 
\f1\b0 (gas exchange between blood and tissues). \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Oxygen
\f1\b0 : Air 
\f3 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 Blood 
\f3 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 Tissues \

\f0\b Carbon Dioxide
\f1\b0 : Tissues 
\f3 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 Blood 
\f3 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 Air \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 Erythrocytes 
\f1\b0 (red blood cells) contain 
\f0\b hemoglobin
\f1\b0 . Hemoglobin is 
\f0\b tetrameric 
\f1\b0 and has a 
\f0\b heme cofactor 
\f1\b0 in each of its four subunits. Heme cofactors are organic molecules that contain 
\f0\b iron atoms
\f1\b0 , which bind oxygen. Thus, each hemoglobin can carry up to 
\f2\i four 
\f1\i0 oxygen molecules. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 Cooperativity 
\f1\b0 describes the process by which the binding of one oxygen molecule to hemoglobin makes it 
\f2\i easier 
\f1\i0 for others to bind due to changes in the shape of the hemoglobin polypeptide. This also works in reverse, allowing efficient unloading of oxygen in body tissues. \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \cb3 Oxyhemoglobin 
\f1\b0 (HbO\dn6 2\up0 ) transports most of the oxygen traveling in the blood. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Carboxyhemoglobin 
\f1\b0 (HbCO) is produced when carbon monoxide outcompetes oxygen for hemoglobin binding. Carbon monoxide poisoning occurs as a result because oxygen can no longer be transported efficiently. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Carbaminohemoglobin 
\f1\b0 (HbCO\dn6 2\up0 ) is a form of hemoglobin that transports carbon dioxide. However, carbon dioxide is much more soluble in blood than oxygen, so most of the carbon dioxide is dissolved in blood as 
\f0\b bicarbonate anion 
\f1\b0 (HCO\dn6 3\up0 ). \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Myoglobin 
\f1\b0 is a single peptide with one heme cofactor. It has a much 
\f2\i higher 
\f1\i0 affinity for oxygen than oxyhemoglobin and is found within cardiac and skeletal muscle cells to bring oxygen in. Also, myoglobin has a 
\f0\b hyperbolic 
\f1\b0 oxygen dissociation curve because it does not undergo 
\f2\i cooperativity 
\f1\i0 (hemoglobin\'92s curve is 
\f0\b sigmoidal
\f1\b0 ). \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 \cb3 Oxygen Dissociation Curve 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 The 
\f0\b oxygen dissociation curve 
\f1\b0 reveals the relationship between the saturation of hemoglobin with oxygen in the blood and the partial pressure of oxygen. Certain conditions will shift this curve either left or right. \cb1 \
\cb3 A 
\f0\b right shifted curve 
\f1\b0 corresponds to a 
\f2\i lowered 
\f1\i0 affinity for oxygen in hemoglobin. Below are the main reasons for a right shifted curve. \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f4\b \cf2 \cb3 \uc0\u9679   
\f0 Decreased pH 
\f1\b0 : a lowered pH means a higher number of protons (H\up10 +\up0 ), which produces reduced hemoglobin. Reduced hemoglobin (H\up10 +\up0 Hb) has a 
\f2\i lowered 
\f1\i0 affinity for binding oxygen, resulting in less HbO\dn6 2\up0 . \cb1 \

\f4\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 High partial pressure of carbon dioxide
\f1\b0 : more carbon dioxide is converted to 
\f0\b bicarbonate anions 
\f1\b0 (HCO\dn6 3\up0 ) and 
\f0\b protons 
\f1\b0 (H\up10 +\up0 ), which 
\f2\i lower 
\f1\i0 oxygen binding affinity through decreased pH. \cb1 \

\f4\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG) 
\f1\b0 aka 
\f0\b 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate (2,3-BPG)
\f1\b0 : accumulates in cells that undergo anaerobic respiration as a result of the loss of oxygen. This compound 
\f2\i decreases 
\f1\i0 oxygen binding affinity so more oxygen is released from hemoglobin to fuel aerobic respiration. \cb1 \

\f4\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Increased body temperature
\f1\b0 : correlates to more cellular respiration, which uses up oxygen and produces more carbon dioxide. Thus, hemoglobin will need to unload more oxygen for tissues to use and have 
\f2\i decreased 
\f1\i0 oxygen binding affinity. \cb1 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 A 
\f0\b left shifted curve 
\f1\b0 corresponds to an 
\f2\i increased 
\f1\i0 affinity for oxygen in hemoglobin. Below are the main reasons for a left shifted curve. \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f4\b \cf2 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Increased pH 
\f1\b0 (more basic): fewer protons (H\up10 +\up0 ) to produce reduced hemoglobin (H\up10 +\up0 Hb), so more oxyhemoglobin (HbO\dn6 2\up0 ) remains. \cb1 \

\f4\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Low partial pressure of carbon dioxide
\f1\b0 : less carbon dioxide is converted to 
\f0\b bicarbonate anions 
\f1\b0 (HCO\dn6 3\up0 ) and 
\f0\b protons 
\f1\b0 (H\up10 +\up0 ), leading to 
\f2\i increased 
\f1\i0 oxygen binding affinity through increased pH. \cb1 \

\f4\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Fetal hemoglobin
\f1\b0 : binds oxygen better than adult hemoglobin to give oxygen to the fetus. \cb1 \

\f4\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Decreased body temperature
\f1\b0 : less cellular respiration, so hemoglobin isn\'92t influenced to unload more oxygen and has an 
\f2\i increased 
\f1\i0 oxygen binding affinity. \cb1 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \cb3 Changes in Hemoglobin Affinity 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Bohr effect 
\f1\b0 - hemoglobin has 
\f2\i decreased 
\f1\i0 oxygen affinity when carbon dioxide is 
\f2\i high
\f1\i0 . Carbon dioxide is converted to bicarbonate anions and protons, which produce 
\f2\i reduced hemoglobin 
\f1\i0 (H\up10 +\up0 Hb). \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Haldane effect 
\f1\b0 - hemoglobin has 
\f2\i increased 
\f1\i0 carbon dioxide affinity when oxygen is 
\f2\i low
\f1\i0 . As a result of low oxygen, reduced hemoglobin (H\up10 +\up0 Hb) levels are higher and have a greater affinity for carbon dioxide. \cb1 \
\

\f0\b\fs48 \cf5 \cb3 Gas Exchange in Tissues 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf2 \cb1 \
\cb3 The 
\f0\b bicarbonate buffering system 
\f1\b0 can be described by the equation below and is catalyzed by 
\f0\b carbonic anhydrase 
\f1\b0 in both directions based on concentrations. Carbonic anhydrase is an enzyme present in red blood cells. \cb1 \
\cb3 CO\dn6 2 \up0 +H\dn6 2\up0 O
\f3 \uc0\u8596 
\f1 H\dn6 2\up0 CO\dn6 3 
\f3 \up0 \uc0\u8596 
\f1 HCO\dn6 3\up10 - \up0 +H\up10 + \

\f0\b \up0 Carbonic acid 
\f1\b0 (H\dn6 2\up0 CO\dn6 3\up0 ) \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Bicarbonate anion 
\f1\b0 (HCO\dn6 3\up10 \'96\up0 ) \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 1.
\f1\b0 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 \cb3 In 
\f0\b erythrocytes 
\f1\b0 (red blood cells) in the systemic circulation, the partial pressure of carbon dioxide is low. As a result, carbon dioxide continuously diffuses in from the tissues, and is converted into bicarbonate and protons. Bicarbonate is able to diffuse out of the cell, however, protons (H\up10 +\up0 ) cannot leave. As some bicarbonate diffuses out, this creates a positive charge within the erythrocyte, and chloride ions (Cl\up10 -\up0 ) must diffuse into the blood cell to cancel out the positive charge of the protons. This process is known as the 
\f0\b chloride shift
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 2.
\f1\b0 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 \cb3 Influx of protons causes the 
\f0\b pH 
\f1\b0 to decrease within the erythrocyte, resulting in the conversion of 
\f2\i oxyhemoglobin 
\f1\i0 into 
\f2\i reduced hemoglobin
\f1\i0 . Reduced hemoglobin has lower affinity for O\dn6 2\up0 , leading to release of oxygen which diffuses to the tissues. \cb1 \
\

\f0\b\fs48 \cf5 \cb3 Gas Exchange in Lungs 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf2 \cb1 \

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 1. 
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Blood travels to the lungs through 
\f0\b bulk flow.\
\
\cf0 \cb1 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 2.
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 Since most of the carbon dioxide is present in the blood plasma as bicarbonate ions (HCO\dn6 3\up10 -\up0 ), the bicarbonate ions re-enter erythrocytes at the lungs and chloride ions leave through the 
\f2\i reverse 
\f0\i0\b chloride shift
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 3.
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 The 
\f0\b bicarbonate buffer system equation 
\f1\b0 proceeds in the 
\f2\i reverse 
\f1\i0 direction, producing carbon dioxide and water. The carbon dioxide exits into the alveoli as gas while oxygen enters the blood, forming 
\f2\i oxyhemoglobin
\f1\i0 . \
\

\f0\b\fs48 \cf5 Breathing Pace 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf2 \cb1 \
\cb3 The 
\f0\b medulla oblongata 
\f1\b0 is located in the brain and controls the diaphragm to regulate respiratory rate. 
\f2\i Central chemoreceptors 
\f1\i0 and 
\f2\i peripheral chemoreceptors 
\f1\i0 signal to the medulla. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Central chemoreceptors 
\f1\b0 are located in the medulla oblongata and contained within the 
\f0\b blood brain barrier
\f1\b0 . Since 
\f2\i carbonic anhydrase 
\f1\i0 is present in the cerebrospinal fluid, carbon dioxide is converted into 
\f0\b bicarbonate ions 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b protons 
\f1\b0 here. However, protons cannot exit through the blood brain barrier. As carbon dioxide accumulates, acidity 
\f2\i increases 
\f1\i0 and is directly sensed by central chemoreceptors, which signal to the medulla oblongata to 
\f2\i increase 
\f0\i0\b breathing rate
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Peripheral chemoreceptors 
\f1\b0 surround the aortic arch and carotid arteries. These peripheral chemoreceptors directly sense oxygen, carbon dioxide, and proton levels to signal to the medulla oblongata. When carbon dioxide is 
\f2\i high 
\f1\i0 and oxygen is 
\f2\i low
\f1\i0 , peripheral chemoreceptors signal to the medulla oblongata to 
\f2\i increase 
\f0\i0\b breathing rate
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\
}