{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;
\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red49\green112\blue185;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c23922\c52157\c77647;
}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Evolution 
\f1\b0 is the 
\f2\i gradual 
\f1\i0 development and change of 
\f2\i heritable 
\f1\i0 traits (
\f0\b allele frequencies
\f1\b0 ) in populations over successive generations. Evolution increases 
\f2\i biodiversity
\f1\i0 . \
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 Evidence of Evolution 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 1. \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Paleontology 
\f1\b0 is the study of 
\f0\b fossils 
\f1\b0 through 
\f0\b actual remains 
\f1\b0 of the animal or their traces (
\f0\b ichnofossils
\f1\b0 ). We can see the transition through time by comparing deepest (
\f2\i oldest
\f1\i0 ) fossils to shallowest (
\f2\i youngest
\f1\i0 ). \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
2. 
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Looking at 
\f0\b biogeography 
\f1\b0 evidence, we can see the spread of different species around the world, both similarities and how they are different. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
3. \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Embryology 
\f1\b0 allows us to see 
\f2\i embryological 
\f1\i0 similarities and differences between early stages of related organisms. Eg. all chordates have a 
\f0\b gill slit 
\f1\b0 during development. 
\f0\b \
\
4. Comparative Anatomy 
\f1\b0 compares different body parts of different animals: \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0

\f3 \cf2 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0\b Homologous structures
\f1\b0 : 
\f2\i may or may not 
\f1\i0 \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 perform the 
\f2\i same function 
\f1\i0 but have a 
\f2\i common ancestor
\f1\i0 . eg. forearm of bird and human. \cb1 \

\f3 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0\b Analogous structures
\f1\b0 : 
\f2\i same function
\f1\i0 , 
\f2\i do not 
\f1\i0 have a common ancestor. eg. bird and bat wings. \cb1 \

\f3 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0\b Vestigial structures
\f1\b0 : serve 
\f2\i no purpose 
\f1\i0 but are 
\f2\i homologous 
\f1\i0 to 
\f2\i functional 
\f1\i0 structures in 
\f2\i other 
\f1\i0 organisms eg. human appendix and cow cecum. \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 5. Biochemical 
\f1\b0 methods allow for DNA sequence comparisons. Can see 
\f0\b conserved DNA 
\f1\b0 sequences (higher similarity = higher relatedness) and 
\f0\b common conserved pathways 
\f1\b0 (eg. Krebs cycle). . \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 \cb3 Theory of Evolution 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 1
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. 
\f0\b Cuvier 
\f1\b0 proposed 
\f0\b catastrophism. 
\f1\b0 Catastrophes lead to 
\f2\i mass extinctions 
\f1\i0 of species in those areas. The different populations in different areas were shaped by what catastrophes had occurred, and what random organisms survived and then populated that area. \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 2. Lam\cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
arck 
\f1\b0 proposed:\cb1 \uc0\u8232 
\f3 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0\b Use and disuse
\f1\b0 : 
\f2\i used 
\f1\i0 body parts will 
\f2\i develop 
\f1\i0 and 
\f2\i unused 
\f1\i0 ones are 
\f2\i weakened, 
\f1\i0 leading to evolution.\cb1 \uc0\u8232 
\f3 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0\b Inheritance of acquired traits
\f1\b0 : traits acquired through use and disuse are passed onto offspring (eg. giraffe stretching neck will cause its neck to develop, and produce long necked offspring). This is 
\f2\i incorrect 
\f1\i0 - acquired characteristics are generally 
\f2\i not heritable. 
\f1\i0 \cb1 \

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
3. Da\cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
rwin 
\f1\b0 - theory of 
\f0\b natural selection
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 \cb3 Natural Selection 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 Natural selection is the 
\f0\b gradual, non-random 
\f1\b0 process where allele frequencies change as a result of 
\f2\i environmental interaction
\f1\i0 . 
\f0\b Survival of the fittest 
\f1\b0 occurs as individuals with greatest 
\f0\b fitness 
\f1\b0 (ability to 
\f0\b survive 
\f1\b0 and produce 
\f2\i viable and fertile 
\f1\i0 offspring) have greatest success, and pass on more DNA to future generations compared to less fit parents. Leads to the evolution of the 
\f0\b population 
\f1\b0 (
\f2\i not 
\f1\i0 individuals). \cb1 \
\cb3 \
Requirements for Natural Selection:\cb1 \

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 1. D\cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
emand 
\f1\b0 for resources 
\f2\i exceeds 
\f0\i0\b supply
\f1\b0 : results in 
\f0\b competition 
\f1\b0 for survival (fittest survive to pass on genes).\cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 2.
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 
\f2\i Difference in levels of fitness 
\f1\i0 due to 
\f0\b variation in traits
\f1\b0 : differentiate ability to compete and survive (eg. black peppered moths favored over white moths during Industrial Revolution). \cb1 \

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
3.
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 Variation in traits 
\f2\i must 
\f1\i0 be 
\f0\b genetically- influenced 
\f1\b0 (heritable) to be passed onto offspring. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
4.
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 Variation in traits must be significant for 
\f0\b reproduction 
\f1\b0 and/or 
\f0\b survival
\f1\b0 : genes improving reproductive success / survival are 
\f2\i favored 
\f1\i0 and increase over generations and 
\f2\i vice versa
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 Types of Natural Selection:\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 1. Stabilizing Selection
\f1\b0 : 
\f2\i mainstream 
\f1\i0 (average) is favored (eg. birth weight). Diagram is standard 
\f0\b bell curve
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f0\b \cb3 2. Directional Selection
\f1\b0 : 
\f2\i one extreme 
\f1\i0 favored (eg. longest giraffe neck allows access to the most leaves). \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f0\b \cb3 3. Disruptive Selection
\f1\b0 : 
\f2\i rare traits 
\f1\i0 favored, mainstream is not. (eg. snails living in low and high vegetation areas). \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 \
}