{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial-BoldMT;
\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f4\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red49\green112\blue185;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c23922\c52157\c77647;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;
}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Origins of Life 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 Timeline: \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f2\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Big Bang
\f1\b0 : ~ 14 billion years ago. \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Earth
\f1\b0 : ~ 4.5 billion years ago. \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Prokaryotes
\f1\b0 : ~ 3.5 billion years ago. \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Eukaryotes
\f1\b0 : ~ 2 billion years ago. Earth\'92s current atmosphere: \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f3 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0\b Nitrogen 
\f1\b0 gas (
\f4\i most common
\f1\i0 ) = 78%. \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f2\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Oxygen 
\f1\b0 gas = 21%. \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Argon 
\f1\b0 gas = 0.9%. \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f3 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f1 Trace amounts of CO\dn6 2\up0 , methane, ozone. \cb1 \
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 Primordial Earth: \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 1.
\f1\b0 \cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 Earth\'92s 
\f4\i primordial atmosphere 
\f1\i0 consisted of 
\f4\i inorganic compounds 
\f1\i0 and 
\f4\i no 
\f1\i0 oxygen - it was a 
\f0\b reducing environment
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 2.
\f1\b0 \cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 Earth cooled down, gases 
\f0\b condensed 
\f1\b0 forming the 
\f0\b primordial sea
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 3.
\f1\b0 \cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 Simple compounds became more complex, 
\f4\i organic compounds 
\f1\i0 formed. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 4.
\f1\b0 \cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 Organic monomers became 
\f0\b polymers 
\f1\b0 forming 
\f0\b protenoids 
\f1\b0 (behave like proteins). \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f0\b \cb3 5. Protobionts 
\f1\b0 arose: precursors to cells. Had 
\f4\i microsomes 
\f1\i0 (membrane-like) and 
\f4\i proteinoids
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f0\b \cb3 6. Heterotrophic prokaryotes 
\f1\b0 form. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f0\b \cb3 7. Autotrophic prokaryotes 
\f1\b0 form (eg. cyanobacteria - can photosynthesize). \cb1 \

\f3 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f1 Important: The development of autotrophs led to the production oxygen - and its accumulation (oxidizing environment forms). \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 8. Oxygen 
\f1\b0 accumulates, reacts with UV forming 
\f4\i ozone layer 
\f1\i0 which blocks UV. This 
\f0\b terminates abiotic chemical evolution
\f4\i\b0 . 
\f1\i0 \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 9. 
\f1\b0 \cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Primitive 
\f0\b eukaryotes 
\f1\b0 form \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0 Endosymbiotic theory
\f1\b0 : \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 membrane-bound organelles (mitochondria, chloroplasts), once free-living, were phagocytosed by other prokaryotes and lived in symbiosis with them, as organelles. \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 10.
\f1\b0 \cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 More 
\f0\b complex 
\f1\b0 eukaryotes and 
\f0\b multicellular 
\f1\b0 organisms come about. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 Organic \'93Soup\'94 Theory
\f1\b0 : proposed by 
\f0\b Oparin 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b Haldane
\f1\b0 . They believed that oxygen is 
\f4\i too reactive 
\f1\i0 for organic chemicals to be produced in primordial atmosphere, and therefore oxygen must have been lacking in the primordial atmosphere. 
\f4\i Strong energy 
\f1\i0 (eg. lightning, volcanic heat, 
\f4\i UV radiation
\f1\i0 ) drove reactions that formed organic compounds. \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 Miller-Urey Experiment
\f1\b0 : mimicked reducing environment proposed by Oparin and Haldane. Set up a flask containing 
\f4\i inorganic compounds and simple organic compounds 
\f1\i0 but 
\f4\i no 
\f1\i0 oxygen (CH\dn6 4\up0 , NH\dn6 3\up0 , H\dn6 2\up0 , H\dn6 2\up0 O) connected it to another flask with electrodes (simulates 
\f4\i lightning
\f1\i0 ) and heated it up (simulates 
\f4\i high temperatures
\f1\i0 ). 
\f4\i Complex organic compounds 
\f1\i0 (
\f4\i amino acids
\f1\i0 , 
\f4\i organic acids, 
\f1\i0 but 
\f4\i no 
\f1\i0 complete nucleic acids) were formed. 
\f0\b Supports 
\f1\b0 the Organic \'93Soup\'94 Theory. \cb1 \
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 \
}