{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;
\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red49\green112\blue185;
\red38\green38\blue38;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c23922\c52157\c77647;
\cssrgb\c20000\c20000\c20000;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Excretion 
\f1\b0 is the filtering out of metabolic wastes from the body\'92s fluids and eliminating them as urine. \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 \cb3 The Kidney 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 Humans have two kidneys. Each kidney consists of a 
\f0\b cortex 
\f1\b0 (outer portion where blood enters the kidney), a 
\f0\b medulla 
\f1\b0 (middle portion), and a 
\f0\b pelvis 
\f1\b0 (inner portion where filtrate exits the kidney). \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 \cb3 The Nephron 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 A 
\f0\b nephron 
\f1\b0 is the single, functional unit of a kidney. There are four main processes that occur in the nephron: \cb1 \
\cb3 1. Filtration\cb1 \
\cb3 2. Reabsorption \
3. Secretion\cb1 \
\cb3 4. Excretion \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 \cb3 Filtration 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 Filtration occurs in cortex at the 
\f0\b renal corpuscle 
\f1\b0 which consists of the 
\f0\b glomerulus 
\f1\b0 and the 
\f0\b Bowman\'92s capsule. 
\f1\b0 Blood enters from the 
\f2\i afferent arteriole 
\f1\i0 into the glomerulus which acts as a sieve. 
\f0\b Podocytes 
\f1\b0 from the Bowman\'92s capsule surround the glomerulus to form 
\f0\b fenestrations 
\f1\b0 allowing small substances (water and solutes) to be filtered into the Bowman\'92s capsule while larger substances (proteins and blood cells) remain in the blood. The glomerulus exits the Bowman\'92s capsule via the 
\f2\i efferent arteriole 
\f1\i0 which goes on to form the 
\f0\b peritubular capillaries
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 \cb3 Reabsorption 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 Throughout the nephron, water and solutes that the body needs are reabsorbed from the filtrate back into the blood.\cb1 \
\cb3 The 
\f0\b loop of Henle 
\f1\b0 descends into the medulla and has selective permeability. It is surrounded by the 
\f0\b vasa recta 
\f1\b0 (capillaries running parallel to the loop of Henle). 
\f2\i Water 
\f1\i0 is reabsorbed into the blood as the filtrate travels down the 
\f0\b descending limb 
\f1\b0 (filtrate becomes more concentrated) and 
\f2\i solutes 
\f1\i0 are reabsorbed as the filtrate travels up the 
\f0\b ascending limb 
\f1\b0 (filtrate becomes less concentrated). \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 \cb3 Secretion 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 Secretion is the transfer of solutions from the blood vasculature directly into the nephron tubule filtrate. This occurs at the 
\f0\b distal convoluted tubule 
\f1\b0 and the 
\f0\b proximal convoluted tubule. 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 \cb3 Excretion 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 The filtrate (now urine) travels from the\cb1  \cb3 nephrons to the 
\f0\b collecting duct 
\f1\b0 which leads to the 
\f0\b renal pelvis 
\f1\b0 and then to the 
\f0\b ureter.\cb1  
\f1\b0 \cb3 The ureter connects the kidney to the 
\f0\b bladder 
\f1\b0 where urine is stored. When the signal is received, urine is excreted from the bladder and the body via the 
\f0\b urethra. 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 \cb3 Hormones 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \cb3 1. Parathyroid Hormone (PTH) 
\f1\b0 = more blood calcium. 
\f2\i Stimulates 
\f1\i0 calcium 
\f2\i reabsorption 
\f1\i0 in the 
\f2\i tubules, 
\f1\i0 and 
\f2\i indirect stimulation 
\f1\i0 of osteoclasts (more bone breakdown) \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 2. Calcitonin
\f1\b0 : less blood calcium (calci
\f2\i tonin tones 
\f1\i0 down calcium). 
\f2\i Inhibits 
\f1\i0 calcium reabsorption in the tubules, 
\f2\i inhibits 
\f1\i0 osteoclasts (
\f2\i less 
\f1\i0 bone breakdown) \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cf5 \cb3 3. Renin Angiotensin Aldosterone System: 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Juxtaglomerular cells 
\f1\b0 can detect changes in blood pressure and sodium levels. When blood pressure or blood sodium is 
\f2\i low
\f1\i0 , these cells release renin. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Renin 
\f1\b0 is an enzyme which acts on 
\f0\b angiotensinogen 
\f1\b0 to activate it to the form 
\f0\b angiotensin I
\f1\b0 . Another enzyme called 
\f0\b Angiotensin Converting Enzyme 
\f1\b0 (ACE) acts on angiotensin I to convert it to angiotensin II. Angiotensin II is the active hormone. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Angiotensin II 
\f1\b0 has many effects in the body. The most important are: \cf2 \cb1 \

\f3 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f1 \cf5 It stimulates additional 
\f0\b aldosterone release 
\f1\b0 from the adrenal gland cortex (so aldosterone levels increase). \cf2 \cb1 \

\f3 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f1 \cf5 It increases 
\f0\b Na\up10 + \up0 reabsorption 
\f1\b0 from the proximal tubule (and water will follow the salt). \cf2 \cb1 \

\f3 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f1 \cf5 It is a potent systemic 
\f0\b vasoconstrictor
\f1\b0 : causing vessels to constrict, thereby increasing total peripheral resistance (TPR). \cf2 \cb1 \

\f3 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f1 \cf5 It makes the individual more 
\f0\b thirsty
\f1\b0 : so they drink more and increase their blood liquid volume (increasing TPR). \cf2 \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 4.
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 
\f0\b Aldosterone: 
\f1\b0 is a 
\f0\b mineralocorticoid 
\f1\b0 produced by the 
\f0\b adrenal cortex
\f1\b0 . It 
\f2\i increases 
\f1\i0 salt and water 
\f0\b reabsorption 
\f1\b0 and potassium 
\f0\b secretion 
\f1\b0 in the distal tubules and collecting ducts \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 5.
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 
\f0\b Antidiuretic Hormone 
\f1\b0 (aka ADH or vasopressin)
\f0\b . 
\f2\i\b0 Released 
\f1\i0 from the 
\f0\b posterior pituitary 
\f1\b0 upon 
\f2\i stimulation 
\f1\i0 from the 
\f0\b hypothalamus
\f1\b0 . Causes 
\f0\b aquaporins 
\f1\b0 to insert into the collecting duct of the nephron and 
\f2\i increases 
\f1\i0 water 
\f2\i reabsorption 
\f1\i0 \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 6.
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 
\f0\b Atrial natriuretic peptide 
\f1\b0 (ANP) is produced by atrial cells in response to atria distension by an increased blood volume and pressure. ANP will reduce the blood volume and blood pressure. It accomplishes this by: Increasing the glomerular filtration rate (GFR); decreasing sodium reabsorption and increasing sodium excretion; inhibiting renin and the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS). \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \
\cf5 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 \
}