{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial-BoldMT;
\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f4\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red49\green112\blue185;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c23922\c52157\c77647;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;
}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{none\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'00;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Carbohydrates 
\f1\b0\fs24 \cf4 \cb1 \

\f0\b\fs36 \cb3 Carbohydrates 
\f1\b0 contain 
\f0\b carbon
\f1\b0 , 
\f0\b hydrogen
\f1\b0 , and 
\f0\b oxygen 
\f1\b0 atoms 
\f0\b (CHO)
\f1\b0 . They can come in the form of 
\f0\b monosaccharides
\f1\b0 , 
\f0\b disaccharides
\f1\b0 , and 
\f0\b polysaccharides
\f1\b0 . \

\f0\b Monosaccharides 
\f1\b0 are carbohydrate monomers with empirical formula of 
\f0\b (CH\dn6 2\up0 O)\dn6 n
\f1\b0 \up0 . \'93n\'94 represent the number of carbons. \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 \
Memorize: 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f2\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0 Ribose 
\f1\b0 - five carbon monosaccharide.\cb1 \uc0\u8232 
\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0 Fructose 
\f1\b0 - six carbon monosaccharide.\cb1 \uc0\u8232 
\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0 Glucose 
\f1\b0 - six carbon monosaccharide.\cb1 \uc0\u8232 
\f3 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f1 Glucose and fructose are 
\f0\b isomers 
\f1\b0 of each other (same chemical formula, different arrangement of atoms). \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 \
Disaccharides 
\f1\b0 contain two monosaccharides joined together by a 
\f0\b glycosidic bond
\f1\b0 . It is the result of a 
\f0\b dehydration (condensation) reaction
\f1\b0 , where a water molecule leaves and a covalent bond forms. A 
\f0\b hydrolysis reaction 
\f1\b0 is the opposite, through which the covalent bond is broken by the addition of water. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 \
Memorize: 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f2\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0 Sucrose 
\f1\b0 - 
\f4\i glucose 
\f1\i0 + 
\f4\i fructose 
\f1\i0 disaccharide. 
\f2\b \uc0\u9679  
\f0 Lactose 
\f1\b0 - 
\f4\i galactose 
\f1\i0 + 
\f4\i glucose 
\f1\i0 disaccharide. 
\f2\b \uc0\u9679  
\f0 Maltose 
\f1\b0 - 
\f4\i glucose 
\f1\i0 + 
\f4\i glucose 
\f1\i0 disaccharide. \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Polysaccharides 
\f1\b0 contain many monosaccharides connected by glycosidic bonds into a long polymer. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 \
Memorize: 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f2\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0 Starch 
\f1\b0 - energy 
\f4\i storage 
\f1\i0 for plants and is an 
\f0\b alpha (\uc0\u945 ) 
\f1\b0 bonded polysaccharide. Linear starch is called 
\f0\b amylose
\f1\b0 , while the branched form is 
\f0\b amylopectin
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0 Glycogen 
\f1\b0 - energy 
\f4\i storage 
\f1\i0 for humans and is an 
\f0\b alpha (\uc0\u945 ) 
\f1\b0 bonded polysaccharide. Much more branching than starch. \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0
\f2\b \cf4 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Cellulose 
\f1\b0 - 
\f4\i structural 
\f1\i0 component in plant cell walls, and is a 
\f0\b beta (\uc0\u946 ) 
\f1\b0 bonded polysaccharide. Linear strands packed rigidly in parallel. \cb1 \
\ls1\ilvl0
\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Chitin 
\f1\b0 - 
\f4\i structural 
\f1\i0 component in fungi cell walls and insect exoskeletons. It is a 
\f0\b beta (\uc0\u946 ) 
\f1\b0 bonded polysaccharide with 
\f0\b nitrogen 
\f1\b0 added to each monomer. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl180\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
}