{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;
\f3\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f4\ftech\fcharset77 Symbol;\f5\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial-BoldMT;
\f6\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red49\green112\blue185;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c23922\c52157\c77647;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;
}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Transcription 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Genes 
\f1\b0 are instructions within DNA that code for proteins. However, they must first be 
\f0\b transcribed 
\f1\b0 into 
\f2\i RNA 
\f1\i0 before being 
\f0\b translated 
\f1\b0 into 
\f2\i proteins
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \
\cb3 Specifically, DNA undergoes 
\f2\i transcription 
\f1\i0 to produce single-stranded 
\f0\b messenger RNA 
\f1\b0 (mRNA). \cb1 \
\cb3 Steps of 
\f0\b transcription: 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 1. Initiation 
\f1\b0 - a 
\f2\i promoter sequence 
\f1\i0 (aka 
\f0\b promoter
\f1\b0 ) next to the gene attracts 
\f0\b RNA polymerase 
\f1\b0 to transcribe the gene. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 2. Elongation 
\f1\b0 - 
\f0\b transcription bubble 
\f1\b0 forms and RNA polymerase travels in the 3\'92 
\f3 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 5\'92 direction on the 
\f0\b template strand
\f1\b0 . However, 
\f0\b it extends RNA in the 5\'92 
\f4\b0 \uc0\u8594 
\f0\b  3\'92 direction
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 3. Termination 
\f1\b0 - a 
\f2\i termination sequence 
\f1\i0 (aka 
\f0\b terminator
\f1\b0 ) signals to 
\f0\b RNA polymerase 
\f1\b0 to stop transcribing the gene. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 Prokaryotic Transcriptional Control 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 In prokaryotes, transcription occurs in the 
\f0\b cytosol
\f1\b0 . RNA polymerase opens up DNA, forming a 
\f0\b transcription bubble
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\cb3 Before transcription can occur, a 
\f0\b sigma factor 
\f1\b0 combines with 
\f0\b prokaryotic core RNA polymerase 
\f1\b0 to form 
\f0\b RNA polymerase holoenzyme
\f1\b0 , giving it the ability to target specific DNA promoter regions. \cb1 \
\cb3 An 
\f0\b operon 
\f1\b0 is a group of genes that is controlled by 
\f2\i one promoter
\f1\i0 , functioning as a single unit. The 
\f0\b operator region 
\f1\b0 is present near the operon\'92s promoter and binds 
\f0\b activator/repressor proteins 
\f1\b0 to regulate the promoter. \cb1 \
\cb3 The 
\f0\b lac operon 
\f1\b0 is an 
\f0\b inducible operon 
\f1\b0 (must be induced to become active). 
\f0\b LacZ
\f1\b0 , 
\f0\b lacY
\f1\b0 , and 
\f0\b lacA 
\f1\b0 are the 
\f2\i three 
\f1\i0 genes contained within the lac operon that encode proteins required for 
\f0\b lactose metabolism
\f1\b0 . The lac operon will only be induced when 
\f2\i glucose 
\f1\i0 is not available as an energy source, so 
\f2\i lactose 
\f1\i0 must be used. \cb1 \
\cb3 The 
\f0\b lac repressor protein 
\f1\b0 is the 
\f2\i first 
\f1\i0 way that the lac operon is controlled. This protein is encoded by an entirely separate gene called 
\f0\b lacI
\f1\b0 , which is 
\f0\b constitutively expressed 
\f1\b0 (always on). Thus, the lac repressor protein is 
\f2\i always 
\f1\i0 bound to the 
\f0\b operator
\f1\b0 , blocking transcription. However, when 
\f0\b lactose 
\f1\b0 is present it is converted to 
\f0\b allolactose
\f1\b0 . Allolactose binds directly to the 
\f2\i repressor 
\f1\i0 and removes it from the operator, allowing transcription to occur. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 cAMP levels and catabolite activator protein (CAP) 
\f1\b0 are the 
\f2\i second 
\f1\i0 level of lac operon regulation. 
\f0\b cAMP levels 
\f1\b0 are 
\f2\i inversely related 
\f1\i0 to 
\f0\b glucose levels
\f1\b0 , so when glucose is low, cAMP is high. cAMP binds to 
\f0\b catabolite activator protein (CAP)
\f1\b0 , which then attaches near the lac operon promoter to help attract 
\f2\i RNA polymerase
\f1\i0 , promoting transcription. \cb1 \
\cb3 Another operon employed by prokaryotes is the 
\f0\b trp operon
\f1\b0 , which is responsible for producing the amino acid 
\f0\b tryptophan
\f1\b0 . It is known as a 
\f0\b repressible operon 
\f1\b0 because it codes for 
\f0\b tryptophan synthetase 
\f1\b0 and is always active unless the presence of tryptophan in the environment 
\f2\i represses 
\f1\i0 the operon. \cb1 \
\cb3 Tryptophan binds to the 
\f0\b trp repressor protein
\f1\b0 , which then attaches to the 
\f0\b operator 
\f1\b0 on the trp operon to prevent tryptophan production. Thus, this is the 
\f2\i first level of trp operon regulation
\f1\i0 . When tryptophan is 
\f2\i not 
\f1\i0 present in the environment, the trp operon will undergo transcription because the trp repressor protein will be 
\f0\b inactive
\f1\b0 . \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 Eukaryotic Transcriptional Control 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 Unlike in prokaryotes, eukaryotic transcription occurs in the 
\f0\b nucleus 
\f1\b0 and uses 
\f0\b RNA polymerase II 
\f1\b0 to transcribe most genes. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Transcription factors 
\f1\b0 are needed in eukaryotes to help RNA polymerase bind to 
\f2\i promoters
\f1\i0 . The 
\f0\b TATA box 
\f1\b0 is a sequence in many promoters that transcription factors can recognize and bind to. \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f5\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Enhancers 
\f1\b0 are DNA sites that 
\f0\b activator 
\f1\b0 proteins can bind to and help 
\f2\i increase 
\f1\i0 transcription of a gene. \cb1 \

\f5\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Silencers 
\f1\b0 are DNA sites that 
\f0\b repressor 
\f1\b0 proteins can bind to and 
\f2\i decrease 
\f1\i0 transcription of a gene. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 Enhancers and silencers can be far 
\f2\i upstream 
\f1\i0 or 
\f2\i downstream 
\f1\i0 from the gene, so DNA from these sites are thought to 
\f0\b loop 
\f1\b0 around to 
\f0\b colocalize 
\f1\b0 with RNA polymerase. \cb1 \
\cb3 The 
\f0\b poly A signal 
\f1\b0 is located within the terminator sequence and stimulates 
\f0\b polyadenylation 
\f1\b0 (addition of adenine nucleotides to the 3\'92 end of the mRNA). \cb1 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 Eukaryotic Post-Transcriptional Modifications 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Post-transcriptional modification 
\f1\b0 describes the 
\f2\i conversion 
\f1\i0 of 
\f0\b pre-mRNA 
\f1\b0 into 
\f0\b processed mRNA
\f1\b0 , which leaves the nucleus. Below are the 
\f0\b three main types 
\f1\b0 of post-transcriptional modification: \cb1 \
\cb3 1. 
\f0\b 5\'92 capping 
\f1\b0 - 7-methylguanosine cap is added to the 5\'92 end of the mRNA 
\f2\i during 
\f1\i0 elongation, protecting the mRNA from 
\f0\b degradation
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\cb3 2. 
\f0\b Polyadenylation of the 3\'92 end 
\f1\b0 - addition of the 
\f0\b poly A tail 
\f1\b0 to prevent 
\f0\b degradation
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\cb3 3. 
\f0\b Splicing out introns 
\f1\b0 - 
\f0\b introns 
\f1\b0 are interruptions in DNA between protein coding DNA called 
\f0\b exons
\f1\b0 . 
\f0\b Splicing 
\f1\b0 refers to removing introns from pre-mRNA using 
\f0\b spliceosomes
\f1\b0 . \'93
\f0\b Splice signals
\f1\b0 \'94 are present within introns, signaling to the spliceosome where to cut. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 snRNAs 
\f1\b0 (small nuclear RNA) and 
\f0\b proteins 
\f1\b0 make up the functional part of a 
\f2\i spliceosome 
\f1\i0 and are collectively referred to 
\f0\b snRNPs 
\f1\b0 (small nuclear RiboNucleic Protein). \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Alternative splicing 
\f1\b0 describes a single 
\f2\i pre-mRNA 
\f1\i0 having various possible spliced mRNA products. Thus, the same pre-mRNA can produce many different 
\f2\i proteins
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 Translation 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Ribosomes 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b tRNA 
\f1\b0 (transfer RNA) are important players in 
\f0\b translation
\f1\b0 , the process of converting 
\f2\i mRNA 
\f1\i0 into 
\f2\i protein products
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Ribosomes 
\f1\b0 are made up of one 
\f0\b small 
\f1\b0 and one 
\f0\b large subunit 
\f1\b0 as described below: \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f5\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Eukaryotes 
\f1\b0 - small 
\f0\b (40S) 
\f1\b0 and large 
\f0\b (60S) 
\f1\b0 subunits form a 
\f0\b 80S ribosome
\f1\b0 . They are composed of 
\f0\b rRNA 
\f1\b0 (ribosomal RNA) and 
\f0\b proteins
\f1\b0 , which are assembled together in the 
\f2\i nucleolus
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \

\f5\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Prokaryotes 
\f1\b0 - small 
\f0\b (30S) 
\f1\b0 and large 
\f0\b (50S) 
\f1\b0 subunits form a 
\f0\b 70S ribosome. 
\f1\b0 They are also composed of 
\f0\b rRNA 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b proteins
\f1\b0 , but are assembled together in the 
\f2\i nucleoid
\f1\i0 . \
\
A 
\f0\b codon 
\f1\b0 is a group of 
\f2\i three 
\f1\i0 mRNA bases (
\f0\b A, U, G, or C
\f1\b0 ) that code for an amino acid or terminate translation. There are 
\f0\b 64 codon combinations 
\f1\b0 total but only 
\f0\b 20 amino acids
\f1\b0 , so 
\f0\b degeneracy 
\f1\b0 is present (multiple codons code for the same amino acid). \cb1 \

\f2\i \cb3 Start 
\f1\i0 codon: 
\f0\b AUG 
\f1\b0 (methionine)\

\f2\i Stop 
\f1\i0 codons: 
\f0\b UAA
\f1\b0 , 
\f0\b UAG
\f1\b0 , 
\f0\b UGA 
\f1\b0 (end translation, do not code for any amino acid) \
\
An 
\f0\b anticodon 
\f1\b0 is a group of 
\f2\i three 
\f0\i0\b tRNA 
\f1\b0 bases (
\f0\b A, U, G, or C
\f1\b0 ) that base pairs with a codon. Each tRNA carries an 
\f2\i amino acid 
\f1\i0 to be added to the growing protein. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Aminoacyl-tRNA 
\f1\b0 refers to a 
\f2\i tRNA 
\f1\i0 bound to an 
\f2\i amino acid
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase 
\f1\b0 is the 
\f2\i enzyme 
\f1\i0 that attaches an amino acid to a specific tRNA using the energy from 
\f2\i ATP
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 Ribosomal binding sites 
\f1\b0 for tRNA: \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 1. 
\f0\b A site 
\f1\b0 - A for 
\f0\b aminoacyl-tRNA
\f1\b0 , which first enters at this site. \cb1 \
\cb3 2. 
\f0\b P site 
\f1\b0 - P for 
\f0\b peptidyl-tRNA
\f1\b0 , which carries the growing polypeptide. \cb1 \
\cb3 3. 
\f0\b E site 
\f1\b0 - E for 
\f0\b exit site
\f1\b0 . The tRNA from the P site is sent here and released from the ribosome. \cb1 \
\
\cb3 The ribosome catalyzes the formation of a 
\f0\b peptide bond 
\f1\b0 between the polypeptide in the P site and the newly added amino acid in the A site. Afterwards, the 
\f2\i polypeptide 
\f1\i0 is transferred to the 
\f0\b A site\'92s tRNA 
\f1\b0 and the ribosome shifts 
\f2\i one codon down 
\f1\i0 the mRNA. The 
\f0\b A site 
\f1\b0 will now be empty and ready to accept another 
\f2\i aminoacyl-tRNA
\f1\i0 . The tRNA from the 
\f0\b P site 
\f1\b0 will be transferred to the E site and will leave the ribosome. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 Mutations 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 A 
\f0\b DNA mutation 
\f1\b0 is a heritable change in the DNA nucleotide sequence that can be passed down to daughter cells. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Three main types 
\f1\b0 of DNA mutations: \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 1. Base substitutions (point mutations) 
\f1\b0 - one nucleotide is replaced by another. Below are various effects they may have: \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0

\f5\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Silent mutations 
\f1\b0 - 
\f0\b no change 
\f1\b0 in 
\f2\i amino acid sequence
\f1\i0 . Due to \'93
\f0\b third base wobble
\f1\b0 \'94, mutations in the DNA sequence that affect the 
\f2\i third 
\f1\i0 base of a codon can still result in the same amino acid being added to the protein. Relies on the 
\f0\b degeneracy 
\f1\b0 (redundancy) of translation. \cb1 \

\f5\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Missense mutations 
\f1\b0 - 
\f0\b single change 
\f1\b0 in 
\f2\i amino acid sequence
\f1\i0 . Can either be 
\f0\b conservative 
\f1\b0 (mutated amino acid similar to unmutated) or 
\f0\b non-conservative 
\f1\b0 (mutated amino acid different from unmutated). \cb1 \

\f5\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Nonsense mutations 
\f1\b0 - 
\f0\b single change 
\f1\b0 in 
\f2\i amino acid sequence 
\f1\i0 that results in a 
\f0\b stop codon
\f1\b0 . Results in early termination of protein. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 2. Insertions 
\f1\b0 - adding nucleotides into the DNA sequence - can shift reading frame. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f0\b \cb3 3. Deletions 
\f1\b0 - removing nucleotides from the DNA sequence - can shift reading frame. \cb1 \
\
\cb3 Factors that 
\f0\b contribute to DNA mutations
\f1\b0 : \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f6 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0\b DNA polymerase errors 
\f1\b0 during DNA replication. \cb1 \

\f6 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f1 Loss of DNA during meiosis 
\f0\b crossing over
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f5\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Chemical damage 
\f1\b0 from drugs. \cb1 \

\f5\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Radiation
\f1\b0 . \
\
Factors that 
\f0\b prevent DNA mutations
\f1\b0 : \cb1 \

\f5\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 DNA polymerase proofreading 
\f1\b0 by DNA polymerase. \cb1 \

\f5\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Mismatch repair 
\f1\b0 machinery that checks uncaught errors. \cb1 \

\f5\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Nucleotide excision repair 
\f1\b0 that cuts out damaged DNA and replaces it with correct DNA using 
\f2\i complementary base pairing
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 \
}