{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;
\f3\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red49\green112\blue185;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c23922\c52157\c77647;
}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs36 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \cb1 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \ul \ulc0 Key Terms \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f2\b Abiotic factors
\f0\b0 : 
\f3\i nonliving 
\f0\i0 elements of an ecosystem (eg. temperature, water, light). \cb1 \

\f1 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f2\b Biotic factors
\f0\b0 : 
\f3\i living 
\f0\i0 elements of an ecosystem (eg. plants, animals, etc.). \cb1 \

\f1 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f2\b Species
\f0\b0 : a group that can 
\f3\i interbreed 
\f0\i0 and have 
\f3\i viable, fertile 
\f0\i0 offspring. \cb1 \

\f1 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f2\b Population
\f0\b0 : a 
\f3\i specific species 
\f0\i0 living in a 
\f3\i specific location. 
\f0\i0 \cb1 \

\f1 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f2\b Habitat
\f0\b0 : the 
\f3\i type of place 
\f0\i0 where a specific organism lives. Includes 
\f3\i other organisms 
\f0\i0 (biotic) and 
\f3\i physical aspects 
\f0\i0 (abiotic). \cb1 \

\f1 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f2\b Ecological community
\f0\b0 : 
\f3\i all populations 
\f0\i0 in a given area. \cb1 \

\f1 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f2\b Ecosystem
\f0\b0 : all the organisms in an ecological community (biotic), and the abiotic factors interacting within it. \cb1 \

\f1 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f2\b Biosphere
\f0\b0 : 
\f3\i all ecosystems 
\f0\i0 on Earth, their interactions with each other and the lithosphere, geosphere, hydrosphere, atmosphere. \cb1 \

\f1 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f2\b Density dependent factors 
\f3\i\b0 depend 
\f0\i0 on 
\f3\i population density 
\f0\i0 (eg. disease, resource competition).\cb1 \

\f1 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f2\b Density independent factors 
\f3\i\b0 do not 
\f0\i0 depend on population density (eg. climate, weather). \cb1 \
\

\f2\b\fs48 \cf4 \cb3 Ecological Niche 
\f0\b0\fs36 \cf2 \cb1 \
\cb3 An organism\'92s 
\f2\b niche 
\f0\b0 is the 
\f3\i biotic 
\f0\i0 and 
\f3\i abiotic 
\f0\i0 resources it uses. Its 
\f2\b realized niche 
\f0\b0 is where it 
\f3\i truly lives 
\f0\i0 and its 
\f2\b fundamental niche 
\f0\b0 is the 
\f3\i full range 
\f0\i0 of environmental conditions where it 
\f3\i could survive
\f0\i0 . \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 Gause\'92s Law 
\f0\b0 (competitive exclusion principle): Two species 
\f3\i cannot 
\f0\i0 occupy the 
\f3\i same niche 
\f0\i0 and maintain population levels: one will 
\f3\i outcompete 
\f0\i0 the other. 
\f2\b Resource partitioning 
\f0\b0 allows species to 
\f3\i coexist
\f0\i0 . \cb1 \
\
}