{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;
\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red49\green112\blue185;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c23922\c52157\c77647;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;
}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Population Ecology 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Population dynamics 
\f1\b0 explores how populations 
\f2\i change in space and time 
\f1\i0 and how they interaction with their environment. \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f3 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0\b Biotic potential
\f1\b0 : a species\'92 ability to undergo its highest population growth (
\f2\i highest births, lowest deaths
\f1\i0 ) when conditions are ideal. \cb1 \

\f3 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0\b Carrying capacity
\f1\b0 : the 
\f2\i maximum population size 
\f1\i0 an ecosystem can sustain. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 \
\cf0 \cb1 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \ul \ulc0 r/K selection theory \cf4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone \

\f0\b \cb3 K-selected species
\f1\b0 : 
\f2\i long gestation 
\f1\i0 period, 
\f2\i few, large offspring
\f1\i0 , 
\f2\i long 
\f1\i0 time to mature, significant 
\f2\i parental investment
\f1\i0 , 
\f2\i high survival 
\f1\i0 to reproductive age (eg. humans, large mammals). Demonstrated by a 
\f0\b type I survivorship curve
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\b \cb3 \
R-selected species
\f1\b0 : 
\f2\i abundant, small 
\f1\i0 offspring, mature 
\f2\i quickly
\f1\i0 , 
\f2\i no parental investment
\f1\i0 , many 
\f2\i do not survive 
\f1\i0 to reproductive age (eg. bacteria, insects, species with free swimming larvae). Demonstrated by a 
\f0\b type III survivorship curve
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 \
In a 
\f0\b type II survivorship curve
\f1\b0 , survival 
\f2\i probability 
\f1\i0 is 
\f2\i constant 
\f1\i0 regardless of age (eg. hydra, some birds & small mammals, lizards). \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 \
}