{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;
\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial-BoldMT;\f4\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red49\green112\blue185;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c23922\c52157\c77647;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;
}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Genetic Building Blocks 
\fs36 \
\cf4 Nucleotide 
\f1\b0 - ribose sugar, nitrogenous base, and phosphate group. \

\f0\b Nucleoside 
\f1\b0 - ribose sugar and nitrogenous base. \

\f0\b DNA 
\f1\b0 is a polymer of 
\f2\i nucleotides 
\f1\i0 that have 
\f0\b hydrogen 
\f1\b0 on the ribose sugar\'92s 2\'92 carbon. 
\f0\b RNA 
\f1\b0 is a polymer of 
\f2\i nucleotides 
\f1\i0 that have 
\f0\b hydroxyl group 
\f1\b0 on the ribose sugar\'92s 2\'92 carbon. This is the reason DNA is called 
\f2\i deoxy
\f0\i0\b ribonucleic acid
\f1\b0 , while RNA is called 
\f0\b ribonucleic acid
\f1\b0 . \

\f0\b Purines 
\f1\b0 are double-ringed nitrogenous bases 
\f0\b adenine 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b guanine
\f1\b0 . \

\f0\b Pyrimidines 
\f1\b0 are single-ringed nitrogenous bases 
\f0\b cytosine
\f1\b0 , 
\f0\b thymine
\f1\b0 , and 
\f0\b uracil
\f1\b0 . \
\
In 
\f0\b DNA:\cb1 \
\cb3 A 
\f1\b0 binds to 
\f0\b T 
\f1\b0 (
\f2\i two 
\f1\i0 hydrogen bonds)\

\f0\b G 
\f1\b0 binds to 
\f0\b C 
\f1\b0 (
\f2\i three 
\f1\i0 hydrogen bonds) \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 In 
\f0\b RNA:\
A 
\f1\b0 binds to 
\f0\b U 
\f1\b0 (
\f2\i two 
\f1\i0 hydrogen bonds)\

\f0\b G 
\f1\b0 binds to 
\f0\b C 
\f1\b0 (
\f2\i three 
\f1\i0 hydrogen bonds)\cb1 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 DNA Organization 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Nucleosomes 
\f1\b0 are complexes of DNA wrapped around 
\f0\b histone 
\f1\b0 proteins. Each nucleosome has 
\f0\b nine 
\f1\b0 histones total. The 
\f2\i central core 
\f1\i0 contains 
\f0\b two 
\f1\b0 of each histone H2A, H2B, H3 and H4. On the 
\f2\i outside
\f1\i0 , a 
\f0\b single 
\f1\b0 histone H1 holds the DNA in place. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Chromatin 
\f1\b0 refers to the overall packaging of 
\f2\i DNA 
\f1\i0 and 
\f2\i histones
\f1\i0 . Below are two types of chromatin: \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 1. Euchromatin 
\f1\b0 - nucleosomes are \'93loosely packed\'94, so DNA is readily accessible for transcription. \

\f0\b 2. Heterochromatin 
\f1\b0 - nucleosomes are \'93tightly packed\'94, so DNA is mostly inactive. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 Histones are 
\f0\b positively 
\f1\b0 charged while DNA is 
\f0\b negatively 
\f1\b0 charged, allowing proper binding. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Acetylation 
\f1\b0 of histones removes positive charges, relaxing DNA-histone attractions and allowing for 
\f2\i more 
\f1\i0 transcription to happen. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Deacetylation 
\f1\b0 of histones increases positive charges, tightening DNA-histone attractions and 
\f2\i decreasing 
\f1\i0 transcription. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Methylation 
\f1\b0 of histones adds methyl groups, 
\f2\i either 
\f1\i0 increasing or decreasing transcription. \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 DNA replication 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 An 
\f0\b origin of replication 
\f1\b0 is required to 
\f2\i initiate 
\f1\i0 DNA replication, where the DNA strands first separate. Organisms with 
\f2\i circular 
\f1\i0 DNA such as bacteria have a 
\f0\b single 
\f1\b0 origin of replication while organisms with 
\f2\i linear 
\f1\i0 DNA such as humans have 
\f0\b multiple 
\f1\b0 origins of replication. \cb1 \
\cb3 DNA undergoes 
\f0\b semiconservative replication
\f1\b0 , where each new double helix produced by replication has one \'93new\'94 strand and one \'93old\'94 strand. \cb1 \
\cb3 DNA is 
\f0\b antiparallel
\f1\b0 , meaning that the 
\f0\b 5\'92 end (terminal phosphate group) 
\f1\b0 of one strand is always next to the 
\f0\b 3\'92 end (terminal hydroxyl group) 
\f1\b0 of the other strand and vice versa. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 Steps of 
\f0\b DNA replication: 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\cb3 1. 
\f0\b Initiation 
\f1\b0 - creating origins of replication at 
\f0\b A-T rich 
\f1\b0 segments of DNA because A-T bonds only have 
\f2\i two 
\f1\i0 hydrogen bonds. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 2. 
\f0\b Elongation 
\f1\b0 - producing 
\f2\i new 
\f1\i0 DNA strands using different types of enzymes.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f3\b \cf4 \uc0\u9679  
\f0 Helicase 
\f1\b0 unzips DNA by breaking 
\f2\i hydrogen bonds 
\f1\i0 between strands, creating the 
\f0\b replication fork
\f1\b0 .\cb1 \uc0\u8232 
\f3\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0 Single-strand binding proteins 
\f1\b0 bind to uncoiled DNA strands, preventing reattachment.\cb1 \uc0\u8232 
\f3\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0 Topoisomerase 
\f1\b0 nicks the DNA double helix 
\f2\i ahead 
\f1\i0 of helicase to relieve built-up tension.\cb1 \uc0\u8232 
\f3\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0 DNA polymerase 
\f1\b0 adds free nucleoside triphosphates to 
\f2\i 3\'92 ends
\f1\i0 .\cb1 \uc0\u8232 
\f3\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0 Primase 
\f1\b0 places 
\f0\b RNA primers 
\f1\b0 at the origin of replication to create 
\f2\i 3\'92 ends 
\f1\i0 for nucleotide addition.\cb1 \uc0\u8232 
\f3\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0 Sliding clamp proteins 
\f1\b0 hold DNA polymerase onto the template strand. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f4 \cf4 \uc0\u9679  
\f1 The 
\f0\b leading strand 
\f1\b0 is produced 
\f2\i continuously 
\f1\i0 because it has a 3\'92 end that faces the replication fork.\

\f4 \uc0\u9679  
\f1 The 
\f0\b lagging strand 
\f1\b0 is produced 
\f2\i discontinuously 
\f1\i0 because its 3\'92 end is facing away from the replication fork. Thus, many 
\f0\b RNA primers 
\f1\b0 are needed to produce short DNA fragments called 
\f0\b Okazaki fragments
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \

\f4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f1 A 
\f2\i different 
\f0\i0\b DNA polymerase 
\f1\b0 replaces RNA primers with DNA. \cb1 \

\f4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0\b DNA ligase 
\f2\i\b0 glues 
\f1\i0 separated fragments of DNA together. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 3. 
\f0\b Termination 
\f1\b0 - replication fork cannot continue, ending DNA replication. \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f3\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Telomeres 
\f1\b0 are noncoding, repeated nucleotide sequences at the ends of 
\f2\i linear chromosomes
\f1\i0 . They are necessary in 
\f0\b eukaryotes 
\f1\b0 because when the replication fork reaches the end of a chromosome, a small segment of DNA from the telomere is not replicated and lost (no RNA primer to help produce another Okazaki fragment). \cb1 \

\f3\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Telomerase 
\f1\b0 is an enzyme that 
\f2\i extends 
\f1\i0 telomeres to prevent DNA loss. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb1 \
}