{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial-BoldMT;
\f3\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;\f4\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f5\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial-BoldItalicMT;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red49\green112\blue185;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c23922\c52157\c77647;
}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Digestion 
\f1\b0 is the process of breaking down large food into smaller substances for absorption by the body. \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f2\b \cf2 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 \cf2 \cb3 Intracellular 
\f1\b0 digestion = 
\f3\i within 
\f1\i0 cells (eg: amoeba 
\f0\b pseudopods 
\f1\b0 bring food inside its single cell for digestion) \cb1 \

\f2\b \cf2 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 \cf2 \cb3 Extracellular 
\f1\b0 digestion = 
\f3\i outside 
\f1\i0 of cells (eg: humans digest food then brings nutrients into its cell for further processing) \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 \cb3 Digestion in Humans 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf2 \cb1 \
\cb3 The digestive tract has 
\f0\b two openings: 
\f1\b0 mouth and anus.\cb1 \
1. 
\f0\b \cb3 Mechanical Digestion 
\f1\b0 = 
\f0\b physical 
\f1\b0 breakdown of food\cb1 \
2. 
\f0\b \cb3 Chemical Digestion 
\f1\b0 = 
\f0\b chemical 
\f1\b0 breakdown of food, using 
\f0\b enzymes. 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\
\

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 \cb3 Mouth, Pharynx, Esophagus 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 Mechanical (chewing) 
\f3\i and 
\f1\i0 chemical (salivary amylase) digestion begin in the 
\f0\b mouth. Salivary amylase 
\f1\b0 in 
\f0\b saliva 
\f1\b0 breaks down starch into maltose (glucose + glucose). Saliva also lubricates the food creating a 
\f0\b bolus
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\cb3 Upon swallowing, food enters the 
\f0\b pharynx 
\f1\b0 (
\f3\i common to digestive and respiratory systems
\f1\i0 ) which 
\f0\b separates 
\f1\b0 to form the 
\f3\i trachea 
\f1\i0 and the 
\f3\i esophagus
\f1\i0 . The 
\f0\b epiglottis 
\f3\i\b0 blocks the opening 
\f1\i0 to the trachea, preventing 
\f0\b choking. 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\cb3 Food continues to the 
\f0\b esophagus 
\f1\b0 (tubular structure guiding food to stomach). The bolus is pushed down via 
\f0\b peristalsis 
\f1\b0 (rhythmic waves of contraction). The 
\f3\i upper third 
\f1\i0 of the esophagus consists of 
\f0\b skeletal muscle, 
\f1\b0 the 
\f3\i lower third 
\f1\i0 consists of 
\f0\b smooth muscle
\f1\b0 , and the 
\f3\i middle third 
\f1\i0 is a 
\f0\b mixture 
\f1\b0 of the two. \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 \cb3 Stomach 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 Food enters the 
\f0\b stomach 
\f1\b0 via the 
\f0\b cardiac sphincter 
\f1\b0 (ring of muscles) where mechanical (
\f3\i churning 
\f1\i0 of food) and chemical (
\f3\i enzymatic 
\f1\i0 breakdown of protein and fat) digestion occur. \cb1 \
\cb3 The stomach lining is filled with 
\f0\b gastric pits 
\f1\b0 leading to 
\f0\b gastric glands 
\f1\b0 (multiple cell types). 
\f0\b Mucous cells 
\f1\b0 produce mucus which 
\f3\i lubricate
\f1\i0 s and 
\f3\i protects 
\f1\i0 the lining from the acid. \cb1 \
\cb3 Food entry causes the stomach to 
\f0\b distend
\f1\b0 , signaling 
\f0\b G cells 
\f1\b0 to release 
\f0\b gastrin
\f1\b0 , a hormone with two functions: \cb1 \
\cb3 1. Stimulates 
\f0\b parietal cells 
\f1\b0 to release 
\f3\i extremely acidic 
\f0\i0\b gastric juice 
\f1\b0 (pH= 
\f0\b 2
\f1\b0 ; high 
\f0\b HCl 
\f1\b0 concentration). \cb1 \
\
\cb3 2. Stimulates 
\f0\b chief cells 
\f1\b0 to secrete 
\f0\b gastric lipase 
\f1\b0 (breaks down fats to 
\f3\i fatty acids + glycerol
\f1\i0 ) and 
\f0\b pepsinogen 
\f1\b0 (a 
\f0\b zymogen 
\f1\b0 - an inactive enzyme precursors) which is activated to 
\f0\b pepsin 
\f1\b0 in acid. Pepsin c
\f3\i leaves 
\f1\i0 peptide bonds (proteins 
\f4 \cf2 \cb3 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 \cf2 \cb3 amino acids). \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 Chyme 
\f1\b0 (acidic, semi-digested food) exists to the small intestine via the 
\f0\b pyloric sphincter. 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 \cb3 Small Intestine 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 Responsible for 
\f0\b 90% of digestion and nutrient absorption. 
\f1\b0 Consists of 3 parts: 
\f0\b duodenum 
\f1\b0 (digestion), 
\f0\b jejunum 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b ileum 
\f1\b0 (absorption).\
\

\f0\b Goblet cells 
\f1\b0 secrete 
\f0\b mucus 
\f1\b0 to 
\f3\i protect 
\f1\i0 the epithelial lining from acidic chyme. Chyme also triggers the release of 
\f0\b secretin 
\f1\b0 (a hormone), stimulating the 
\f0\b pancreas 
\f1\b0 to release 
\f3\i basic 
\f0\i0\b bicarbonate ions (HCO\cf2 \cb3 \dn6 3\up10 -\cf2 \cb3 \up0 ) 
\f1\b0 into the 
\f3\i duodenum 
\f1\i0 via the 
\f0\b pancreatic duct
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Cholecystokinin (CCK) 
\f1\b0 released by the small intestine: slows gastric emptying, stimulates 
\f0\b pancreas 
\f1\b0 to release 
\f3\i digestive enzymes 
\f1\i0 and 
\f0\b gallbladder 
\f1\b0 to release 
\f0\b bile 
\f1\b0 into the duodenum. \cb1 \
\cb3 Accessory organs in the digestive system include the 
\f0\b pancreas, liver, 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b gallbladder. 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Bile 
\f1\b0 (emulsifies fats) is 
\f3\i produced 
\f1\i0 by the 
\f0\b liver 
\f1\b0 and 
\f3\i stored 
\f1\i0 and 
\f3\i concentrated 
\f1\i0 by the 
\f0\b gallbladder. 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\cb3 The 
\f0\b pancreas 
\f1\b0 secretes 
\f0\b HCO\cf2 \cb3 \dn6 3\up10 - 
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 \up0 (neutralization), 
\f0\b pancreatic amylase 
\f1\b0 (starch 
\f4 \cf2 \cb3 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 \cf2 \cb3 maltose) and 
\f0\b proteases 
\f1\b0 (proteins 
\f4 \cf2 \cb3 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 \cf2 \cb3 amino acids). The pancreatic proteases are 
\f0\b trypsin and chymotrypsin
\f1\b0 , which are initially released as 
\f0\b zymogens 
\f1\b0 (
\f3\i trypsinogen 
\f1\i0 and 
\f3\i chymotrypsinogen
\f1\i0 ). 
\f0\b Enteropeptidase 
\f1\b0 in the duodenum converts trypsinogen to trypsin which then converts chymotrypsinogen to chymotrypsin. \cb1 \
\
\cb3 Food is moved via 
\f0\b peristalsis 
\f1\b0 to the 
\f0\b jejunum 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b ileum 
\f1\b0 for 
\f3\i absorption
\f1\i0 . 
\f0\b Villi 
\f1\b0 (finger-like projections which increase surface area), made of 
\f0\b enterocytes 
\f1\b0 are lined with 
\f0\b microvilli. 
\f1\b0 Villi and microvilli 
\f0\b increase surface area 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b absorption efficiency. Crypts 
\f1\b0 (invagintions in the intestinal wall) contain cells that 
\f3\i secrete 
\f1\i0 enzymes and 
\f3\i produce 
\f1\i0 new lining epithelial cells \cb1 \
\cb3 Inside the villus, 
\f3\i nutrients 
\f1\i0 (glucose and amino acids) are 
\f3\i absorbed 
\f1\i0 into 
\f0\b blood capillaries 
\f1\b0 and 
\f3\i fats 
\f1\i0 (fatty acids and glycerol) into 
\f0\b lacteals
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 \cb3 Liver 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 In addition to 
\f0\b bile production, 
\f1\b0 the 
\f0\b liver 
\f1\b0 is involved in many processes. \cb1 \
\
\cb3 1. \cf0 \cb1 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \ul \ulc0 Blood Maintenance \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f2\b \cf2 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Stores 
\f1\b0 blood. \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Filters 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b detoxifies 
\f1\b0 blood coming from the 
\f3\i digestive system 
\f1\i0 via the 
\f0\b hepatic portal system. 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Destroys 
\f3\i\b0 erythrocytes 
\f1\i0 and 
\f3\i bacteria
\f1\i0 . 
\f0\b Kupffer cells 
\f1\b0 (
\f0\b phagocytes
\f1\b0 ) eat bacteria and break down 
\f0\b hemoglobin 
\f1\b0 in red blood cells (red) to 
\f0\b bilirubin 
\f1\b0 (yellow) for secretion in the 
\f0\b bile. 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\
\cb3 2. \cf0 \cb1 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \ul Glucose Metabolism \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Glycogenesis 
\f1\b0 - 
\f3\i converts 
\f1\i0 excess glucose into 
\f0\b glycogen 
\f1\b0 for storage in the liver (after meals). \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Glycogenolysis 
\f1\b0 - 
\f3\i breaks down 
\f1\i0 glycogen to 
\f0\b glucose 
\f1\b0 for bodily use (between meals). \cb1 \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Gluconeogenesis 
\f1\b0 - 
\f3\i converts 
\f0\i0\b glycerol 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b amino acids 
\f1\b0 into 
\f0\b glucose 
\f1\b0 when glycogen stores are 
\f3\i depleted. 
\f1\i0 \cb1 \
\
\cb3 3. \cf0 \cb1 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \ul Protein Metabolism \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone \

\f2\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f3\i\b0 Synthesizes 
\f0\i0\b plasma proteins 
\f1\b0 from amino acids (
\f0\b albumin 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b blood clotting factors
\f1\b0 ). \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f5\i\b \cf2 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f3\b0 Converts 
\f0\i0\b ammonia 
\f1\b0 (
\f3\i dangerous 
\f1\i0 byproduct of protein metabolism) to 
\f0\b urea 
\f1\b0 (safer) for excretion. \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 \cb3 Large Intestine 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 Water and mineral 
\f3\i absorption 
\f1\i0 occur at the 
\f0\b cecum 
\f1\b0 (small pouch). The 
\f0\b appendix 
\f1\b0 (projection in the cecum) is a 
\f0\b vestigial structure 
\f1\b0 with negligible immune function and can become inflamed (
\f0\b appendicitis
\f1\b0 ). In the 
\f0\b colon 
\f3\i\b0 water absorption 
\f1\i0 is completed, hardening feces. The feces is 
\f3\i stored 
\f1\i0 in the 
\f0\b rectum 
\f1\b0 and 
\f3\i expelled 
\f1\i0 through the 
\f0\b anus. 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\cb3 The large intestine has 3 functions:\cb1 \
\cb3 1. 
\f0\b Water absorption
\f1\b0 .\cb1 \
\
\cb3 2. 
\f0\b Mineral absorption 
\f1\b0 (salts).\cb1 \
\
\cb3 3. 
\f0\b Vitamin production 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b absorption
\f1\b0 : in a 
\f0\b mutualistic 
\f1\b0 relationship, bacteria 
\f3\i produce 
\f0\i0\b vitamins B 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b K 
\f1\b0 (
\f3\i absorbed
\f1\i0 ), 
\f0\b metabolize bile acid
\f1\b0 , and 
\f0\b ferment fiber. 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb1 \
}