{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;
\f3\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;\f4\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red49\green112\blue185;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c23922\c52157\c77647;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;
}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Invertebrate Circulation 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 1.
\f1\b0 \cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 
\f0\b No circulatory system 
\f1\b0 \'96 use simple diffusion to distribute nutrients. Includes bacteria, protista, fungi, invertebrate animals. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 2.
\f1\b0 \cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 
\f0\b Open circulatory system 
\f1\b0 \'96 pump fluid called hemolymph into sinuses or 
\f0\b hemocoel. 
\f1\b0 Includes some mollusca, arthropoda, Echinodermata. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 3. \cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Closed circulatory system 
\f1\b0 \'96 Use a pumping heart to move blood through vessels. Includes annelida (earthworms) \cb1 \
\
\

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 Vertebrate Circulation 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\cb3 Most 
\f0\b chordates 
\f1\b0 (eukaryotic vertebrate within kingdom Animalia) have a 
\f0\b closed circulatory system
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f2 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0\b 2 chamber hearts 
\f1\b0 (atrium and ventricle) \'96 fish. Deoxygenated blood fills the heart and is pumped to the gills for oxygen exchange. \cb1 \

\f2 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0\b 3 chamber hearts 
\f1\b0 (2 atriums and 1 ventricle) \'96 amphibians and reptiles. Poikilothermic chordates. Alligators and crocodiles are exceptions, they have 4 chamber hearts. \cb1 \

\f2 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0\b 4 chamber hearts 
\f1\b0 (2 atriums and 2 ventricles) \'96 bird and humans. Homeothermic chordates. \cb1 \
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Flow of blood through heart 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 1. Right atrium 
\f1\b0 \'96 
\f3\i Deoxygenated 
\f1\i0 blood is returned here from the 
\f0\b upper superior vena cava 
\f1\b0 and the 
\f0\b lower inferior vena cava
\f1\b0 . Blood passes through the right atrioventricular valve 
\f0\b (AV valve, or tricuspid valve) 
\f1\b0 to the right ventricle. AV valve is attached to 
\f0\b papillary muscles
\f1\b0 , which contract to close the AV valves and prevent backflow of blood. \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 2. Right ventricle 
\f1\b0 \'96 Pumps 
\f3\i deoxygenated 
\f1\i0 blood through the pulmonary semilunar valve to the pulmonary artery. Blood enters pulmonary circulation. When the ventricle 
\f3\i contracts
\f1\i0 , the AV valve is closed and the 
\f0\b pulmonary semilunar 
\f1\b0 valve is open. When the ventricle 
\f3\i relaxes
\f1\i0 , the AV valve is open to refill the ventricle, and the pulmonary semilunar valve closes to prevent the backflow of blood. \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 3. \cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Left atrium 
\f1\b0 \'96 
\f3\i Oxygenated 
\f1\i0 blood is returned here from the lungs from the pulmonary vein. Blood passes through the left 
\f0\b AV valve 
\f1\b0 (or bicuspid, or mitral valve) to the left ventricle. \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 4. Left ventricle 
\f1\b0 \'96 Most muscular chamber of the heart. Pumps 
\f3\i oxygenated 
\f1\i0 blood into the 
\f0\b aorta 
\f1\b0 and systemic circulation. \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 Pulmonary circulation 
\f1\b0 moves deoxygenated blood from heart to the lungs and back in order for it to become oxygenated. Pathway: \
Right atrium 
\f4 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 tricuspid valve 
\f4 \uc0\u8594 \cb1  
\f1 \cb3 right ventricle 
\f4 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 pulmonary semilunar valve 
\f4 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 pulmonary arteries 
\f4 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 lung 
\f4 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 pulmonary veins 
\f4 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 left atrium \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Systemic circulation 
\f1\b0 moves oxygenated blood from the heart throughout the body. Pathway: \cb1 \
\cb3 Left atrium
\f4 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 bicuspid valve
\f4 \uc0\u8594 
\f1 left ventricle
\f4 \uc0\u8594 
\f1 aortic semilunar valve
\f4 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 aorta
\f4 \uc0\u8594 
\f1 body 
\f4 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 vena cava 
\f4 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 right atrium \
\
\

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 Human Cardiac Cycle 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 The heart needs to contract and relax rhythmically in order to pump blood throughout the body. 
\f0\b Cardiomyocytes 
\f1\b0 (heart muscle cells) have a property of 
\f0\b automaticity
\f1\b0 , which means they are self-excitable and able to initiate an action potential without an external nerve. \cb1 \
\
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \ul \ulc0 The cardiac cycle:\cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone  \cb1 \

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 1.
\f1\b0 \cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 
\f0\b The SA node (pacemaker) 
\f1\b0 is located in the upper wall of the right atrium and usually initiates the cardiac cycle. It has the greatest automaticity and is most likely to reach threshold to stimulate a heartbeat. It sends a signal to contract both atria to send blood to the ventricles. It also sends a signal to the AV node to initiate contraction too. \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 2. \cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The AV node 
\f1\b0 is located in the lower wall of the right atrium. The function of the AV node is to add a brief delay between the contraction of the atria and the contraction of the ventricles. It also sends a signal to the 
\f0\b bundle of His
\f1\b0 , located in the interventricular septum between the ventricles. The bundle of His carries the signal to the 
\f0\b Purkinje fibers 
\f1\b0 which contract the ventricles. \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 Systole 
\f1\b0 occurs right after the 
\f0\b ventricles 
\f1\b0 eject their blood into the 
\f0\b arteries 
\f1\b0 they connect to. Therefore, it is the phase of the cardiac cycle where blood pressure is 
\f3\i highest 
\f1\i0 in the 
\f0\b arteries
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Diastole 
\f1\b0 occurs right after the 
\f0\b atria 
\f1\b0 contract to fill the 
\f0\b ventricles
\f1\b0 . The 
\f0\b myocardium 
\f1\b0 is completely relaxed at this point. Diastole is the phase of the cardiac cycle where blood pressure is 
\f3\i lowest 
\f1\i0 in the 
\f0\b arteries
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 Blood Vessels 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 Vessels transport blood to and from the heart in a closed circulatory system. 
\f0\b Arteries 
\f1\b0 move blood 
\f3\i away 
\f1\i0 from the heart, while 
\f0\b veins 
\f1\b0 move blood 
\f3\i toward 
\f1\i0 the heart. \cb1 \
\cb3 Arteries are where blood pressure is the highest due to the hydrostatic pressure from the heart. They branch off into smaller arteries called 
\f0\b arterioles
\f1\b0 . This is where we see the greatest drop off of blood pressure. Arterioles branch further into 
\f0\b capillaries
\f1\b0 , which are vessels that are 1 cell thick and diffuse gas and nutrients to the interstitial fluid. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Capillaries 
\f1\b0 also collect waste and CO2  and enter a venule, which then connects to a vein, which brings the blood back to the heart. Blood moves back to the heart by a series of valves within the 
\f0\b veins 
\f1\b0 that prevents backflow of blood. Skeletal muscles squeeze the veins to push the blood forward, it is 
\f3\i not 
\f1\i0 the pumping of the heart that moves blood through the veins. \cb1 \
\cb3 Veins contain more blood by volume than arteries and have the lowest blood pressure of all vessels. \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 Components of Blood 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 1. Plasma 
\f1\b0 contains water, proteins, nutrients, hormones, and makes up most of the blood volume.  \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 2. White blood cells (leukocytes) 
\f1\b0 are our immune cells and defend against infection. The most common white blood cell is the 
\f0\b neutrophil
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 3. Platelets (thrombocytes) 
\f1\b0 are cell fragments that do not have a nucleus, they are responsible for clotting. Large bone marrow cells called 
\f0\b megakaryocytes 
\f1\b0 are the precursor to platelets. Platelets release factors that help convert 
\f0\b fibrinogen 
\f1\b0 into 
\f0\b fibrin
\f1\b0 , which creates a \'91net\'92 to stop bleeding. Many of the clotting factors are synthesized with 
\f0\b Vitamin K
\f1\b0 , a deficiency in Vitamin K will lead to increased bleeding. \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 4. Red blood cells (erythrocytes) 
\f1\b0 are responsible for transporting oxygen attached to hemoglobin. Maturered blood cells are 
\f0\b anucleate 
\f1\b0 (they don\'92t have a nucleus) in order to maximize the amount of space they have to carry hemoglobin and oxygen. \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 Blood Types 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 Red blood cells (erythrocytes) have 
\f0\b antigens 
\f1\b0 on their surface. These antigens are little sugars and proteins that mark our blood as a certain type. Blood types are described as follows. \cb1 \
\cb3 1. Type A blood \'96 has \'91A\'92 antigen\cb1 \
\cb3 2. Type B blood \'96 has \'91B\'92 antigen\cb1 \
\cb3 3. Type AB blood \'96 has both \'91A\'92 and \'91B\'92 antigens\
4. Type O blood \'96 has neither \'91A\'92 or \'91B\'92 antigens \cb1 \
\
\cb3 In addition to blood type A and B, your body also has another surface protein called the 
\f0\b Rhesus factor (Rh). 
\f1\b0 You either have Rh (+) or you don\'92t have Rh (-). If a donor is Rh(+) , they cannot donate to someone who is Rh(-), because the donor has antigens on the surface of the blood cell. \cb1 \
\cb3 A 
\f0\b universal donor 
\f1\b0 (blood donor who can donate to anyone) is O (-). O blood type has neither A nor B surface antigens, and O (-) blood also does not have an Rh surface antigen. This means there are no blood cell surface antigens that would stimulate immune clearance by someone receiving the O (-) blood. \cb1 \
\cb3 A 
\f0\b universal acceptor 
\f1\b0 is AB (+). Because an AB (+) person has both A and B cell surface antigens, as well as an Rh surface antigen, they can receive any blood type and not mount an immune response. Any blood cell surface antigen they receive would be something their blood cells already have. \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 Lymphatic System 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 Nutrient and gas exchange occurs at the level of the capillaries. 
\f0\b Hydrostatic pressure 
\f1\b0 pushes fluid out of the capillaries on the arterial end into interstitial space. 
\f0\b Oncotic pressure
\f1\b0 , a type of 
\f0\b osmotic pressure
\f1\b0 , brings fluid back into the capillaries at the venule end. However, not all the fluid is reabsorbed from the interstitial space into the venule. \cb1 \
\cb3 Lymphatic capillaries collect the remaining fluid, called 
\f0\b lymph
\f1\b0 , consisting of interstitial fluid, bacteria, fats, and proteins. The lymphatic capillaries merge together to form larger vessels that travel to the heart. Along the way, the lymph is filtered through 
\f0\b lymph nodes
\f1\b0 , which are centers for the immune response system to eliminate infections. Lymph vessels have no pressure like veins, and the fluid moves back towards the heart due to the constriction of skeletal muscle and backflow of fluid is prevented with a system of valves, similar to veins. \cb1 \
\cb3 \
\cb1 \
}