{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;
\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f4\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red49\green112\blue185;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c23922\c52157\c77647;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;
}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Flower Structures 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 1. Petals
\f1\b0 : attract animals to achieve pollination. \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 2. Stamen
\f1\b0 : 
\f2\i male 
\f1\i0 plant 
\f2\i sex organ
\f1\i0 . Composed of 
\f0\b anther 
\f1\b0 (site of 
\f2\i microspore formation
\f1\i0 ) and 
\f0\b filament 
\f1\b0 (supports anther). \cb1 \

\f3 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f1 Microspore undergoes 
\f2\i mitosis 
\f1\i0 to form 
\f0\b generative cell 
\f1\b0 (contains sperm) and 
\f0\b tube cell 
\f1\b0 which combine to form 
\f0\b pollen
\f1\b0 .\cb1 \
\
\cb3 3. 
\f0\b Pistil
\f1\b0 : 
\f2\i female 
\f1\i0 plant 
\f2\i sex organ
\f1\i0 . Composed of 
\f0\b stigma 
\f1\b0 (top), 
\f0\b style 
\f1\b0 (tube leading to ovary), and 
\f0\b ovary 
\f1\b0 (contains 
\f0\b ovule 
\f1\b0 or egg). \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 Fertilization 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 Pollen lands on stigma 
\f4 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 tube cell elongates down style forming 
\f0\b pollen tube 
\f4\b0 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 generative cell travels down pollen tube to ovary 
\f4 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 splits forming 
\f2\i two sperm cells 
\f1\i0 (
\f0\b double fertilization) 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f3 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f1 One sperm cell meets ovule forming the seed or 
\f0\b embryo
\f1\b0 . Ovary develops into fruit which is eaten by animals and deposited in a 
\f2\i new location 
\f1\i0 (
\f0\b gene migration
\f1\b0 ). \cb1 \

\f3 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f1 The other sperm cell combines with ovule\'92s polar nuclei forming 
\f0\b endosperm
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 Alternation of Generations 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 Alternation between 
\f0\b diploid and haploid. 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\cb3 Two haploid 
\f0\b gametes 
\f2\i\b0 fuse 
\f1\i0 producing diploid 
\f0\b zygote 
\f4\b0 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 zygote becomes 
\f0\b sporophyte 
\f1\b0 via 
\f2\i mitosis 
\f4\i0 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 in their sporangia, sporophyte undergoes 
\f2\i meiosis 
\f1\i0 to produce haploid 
\f0\b spores 
\f4\b0 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 spore becomes 
\f0\b gametophyte 
\f1\b0 via 
\f2\i mitosis 
\f4\i0 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 gametophyte produces 
\f0\b gametes 
\f4\b0 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 cycle repeats. \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 Homosporous vs. Heterosporous Plants 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Homosporous plants
\f1\b0 : 
\f2\i bisexual gametophyte
\f1\i0 , produces 
\f2\i one type 
\f1\i0 of spore. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Heterosporous plants
\f1\b0 : produce 
\f2\i two types 
\f1\i0 of spores; 
\f2\i micro
\f1\i0 spores (male) and 
\f2\i mega
\f1\i0 spores (female). \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 Angiosperms: Monocots vs. Dicots 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Cotyledons
\f1\b0 : first leaves to appear on seedling. Contain nutrients from seed to feed growing seedling. \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 Monocotyledons:\
Single 
\f1\b0 cotyledon \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Long narrow 
\f1\b0 leaf\

\f0\b Parallel 
\f1\b0 veins \cb1 \
\cb3 Vascular bundles 
\f0\b scattered 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\cb3 Floral parts in multiples of 
\f0\b 3 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 Dicotyledons:\
Two 
\f1\b0 cotyledon \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Broad 
\f1\b0 leaf \

\f0\b Network 
\f1\b0 of veins \cb1 \
\cb3 Vascular bundles in a 
\f0\b ring 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\cb3 Floral parts in multiples of 
\f0\b 4 or 5 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\
\
\
}