{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;
\f3\ftech\fcharset77 Symbol;\f4\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial-BoldMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red49\green112\blue185;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c23922\c52157\c77647;
}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid3}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Metabolism 
\f1\b0 refers to all the 
\f2\i metabolic pathways 
\f1\i0 (series of chemical reactions) that are happening in a given organism. 
\f0\b Catabolic 
\f1\b0 processes involve 
\f2\i breaking down 
\f1\i0 larger molecules for energy while 
\f0\b anabolic 
\f1\b0 processes involve using energy to 
\f2\i build 
\f1\i0 larger macromolecules. \
\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 To break down 
\f2\i carbohydrates 
\f1\i0 for energy, cells either utilize 
\f0\b aerobic cellular respiration 
\f1\b0 (consumes oxygen, more energy produced) or 
\f0\b anaerobic cellular respiration 
\f1\b0 (no oxygen needed, but less energy produced).\
\
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 \cb3 Adenosine Triphosphate 
\f1\b0\fs24 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 \cb3 Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) 
\f1\b0 is an 
\f2\i RNA nucleoside triphosphate
\f1\i0 . It contains an 
\f0\b adenine nitrogenous base 
\f1\b0 linked to a 
\f0\b ribose sugar 
\f1\b0 (RNA nucleoside part), and 
\f0\b three phosphate groups 
\f1\b0 connected to the sugar (triphosphate part). \cf2 \cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
ATP is used as the 
\f0\b cellular energy currency 
\f1\b0 because of 
\f0\b high energy bonds 
\f1\b0 between the phosphate groups. These bonds release energy upon 
\f2\i hydrolysis 
\f1\i0 (breaking bonds). \
\

\f0\b Reaction coupling 
\f1\b0 is the process of powering an energy-requiring reaction with an energy-releasing one. It allows an unfavorable reaction to be powered by a favorable reaction, making the 
\f2\i net 
\f1\i0 Gibbs free energy 
\f0\b negative 
\f1\b0 (-\uc0\u916 G = exergonic = releases energy + spontaneous). \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 \cb3 Mitochondria 
\f1\b0\fs24 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 \cb3 Mitochondria 
\f1\b0 are organelles that produce ATP through 
\f2\i cellular respiration 
\f1\i0 (catabolic process). They have an 
\f0\b outer membrane 
\f1\b0 and an 
\f0\b inner membrane 
\f1\b0 with many infoldings called 
\f0\b cristae
\f1\b0 . The 
\f0\b intermembrane space 
\f1\b0 is located 
\f2\i between 
\f1\i0 the outer and inner membranes while the 
\f0\b mitochondrial matrix 
\f1\b0 is located 
\f2\i within 
\f1\i0 the inner membrane. \
\
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 \cb3 Aerobic Cellular Respiration 
\f1\b0\fs24 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 \cb3 Aerobic cellular respiration 
\f1\b0 is performed to phosphorylate ADP into ATP, by breaking down glucose and moving electrons around (
\f2\i oxidation 
\f1\i0 and 
\f2\i reduction 
\f1\i0 reactions). Aerobic cellular respiration involves 
\f0\b 4 catabolic 
\f1\b0 processes: \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 1. Glycolysis\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 2. Pyruvate manipulations\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 3. Krebs cycle\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb3 4. Oxidative phosphorylation \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 1. Glycolysis\
Glucose 
\f3\b0 \uc0\u8594 
\f0\b  2 ATP + 2 NADH + 2 pyruvate 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\cb3 Glycolysis takes place in the 
\f0\b cytosol 
\f1\b0 and does 
\f2\i not 
\f1\i0 require 
\f0\b oxygen
\f1\b0 , so it is also used in 
\f2\i fermentation
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Substrate-level phosphorylation 
\f1\b0 is the process used to generate ATP in glycolysis, transferring a phosphate group to ADP directly from a 
\f2\i phosphorylated compound
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \
\cb3 Glycolysis has an 
\f0\b energy investment phase 
\f1\b0 and an 
\f0\b energy payoff phase
\f1\b0 : \cb1 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf2 \cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	1.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Hexokinase 
\f1\b0 uses 
\f2\i one 
\f1\i0 ATP to 
\f2\i phosphorylate 
\f1\i0 glucose into 
\f0\b glucose-6-phosphate
\f1\b0 , which cannot leave the cell (it becomes trapped by the phosphorylation). \cb1 \
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b \cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	2.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Isomerase 
\f1\b0 modifies glucose-6-phosphate into 
\f0\b fructose-6-phosphate
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b \cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	3.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Phosphofructokinase 
\f1\b0 uses a 
\f2\i second 
\f1\i0 ATP to phosphorylate fructose-6-phosphate into 
\f0\b fructose-1,6-bisphosphate
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0\cf2 \cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f0\b \cf0 \cb1 4.
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fructose-1,6-bisphosphate is broken into 
\f0\b dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (G3P)
\f1\b0 , which are in equilibrium with one another. \cb1 \
\ls1\ilvl0\cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f0\b \cf0 \cb1 5.
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
G3P proceeds to the 
\f2\i energy payoff phase 
\f1\i0 so DHAP is constantly 
\f0\b converted into G3P 
\f1\b0 to maintain 
\f2\i equilibrium
\f1\i0 . Thus, 
\f0\b 1 glucose 
\f1\b0 molecule will produce 
\f0\b 2 G3P 
\f1\b0 that continue into the next steps. \cb1 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf2 \cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	6.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
G3P 
\f1\b0 undergoes a series of redox reactions to produce 
\f0\b 4 ATP 
\f1\b0 through 
\f0\b substrate-level-phosphorylation
\f1\b0 , 
\f0\b 2 pyruvate 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b 2 NADH
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 Because 2 ATP are used up in the energy 
\f2\i investment 
\f1\i0 phase and 4 ATP are produced in the energy 
\f2\i payoff 
\f1\i0 phase, a 
\f0\b net of 2 ATP i
\f1\b0 s produced within glycolysis. \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 2. Pyruvate manipulations\
2 pyruvate 
\f3\b0 \uc0\u8594  
\f0\b 2 CO\cf2 \cb3 \dn6 2 \cf2 \cb3 \up0 + 2 NADH + 2 acetyl-CoA 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Pyruvate dehydrogenase 
\f1\b0 is an enzyme that carries out the pyruvate manipulation steps below: \cb1 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0
\ls2\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf2 \cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	1.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Decarboxylation 
\f1\b0 - Pyruvate molecules (3 carbon molecule) move from the cytosol into the 
\f0\b mitochondrial matrix 
\f1\b0 (stays in the 
\f2\i cytosol 
\f1\i0 for prokaryotes), where they undergo 
\f2\i decarboxylation
\f1\i0 , producing 1 CO\dn6 2 \up0 and one two carbon molecule per pyruvate. \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0
\ls2\ilvl0\cf2 \cb1 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f0\b \cf0 2.
\f1\b0 \cf2 	}
\f0\b \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Oxidation 
\f1\b0 - The two-carbon molecule is converted into an 
\f0\b acetyl group
\f1\b0 , giving electrons to 
\f0\b NAD\up10 + 
\f1\b0 \up0 to convert it into 
\f0\b NADH
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f0\b \cf0 3.
\f1\b0 \cf2 	}
\f0\b \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Coenzyme A (CoA) 
\f1\b0 - CoA binds to the acetyl group, producing 
\f0\b acetyl-CoA
\f1\b0 . \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \cb3 3. Krebs cycle 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 2 acetyl-CoA 
\f3\b0 \uc0\u8594  
\f0\b 4 CO\cf2 \cb3 \dn6 2 \cf2 \cb3 \up0 + 6 NADH + 2 FADH\cf2 \cb3 \dn6 2 \cf2 \cb3 \up0 + 2 GTP 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\cb3 The Krebs cycle is also known as the 
\f0\b citric acid cycle 
\f1\b0 or the 
\f0\b tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle
\f1\b0 . Like pyruvate manipulations, it also occurs in the 
\f0\b mitochondrial matrix 
\f1\b0 and the 
\f2\i cytosol 
\f1\i0 for prokaryotes. \cb1 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0\cf2 \cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f0\b \cf0 \cb1 1.
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 	}
\f0\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Acetyl-CoA 
\f1\b0 joins 
\f0\b oxaloacetate 
\f1\b0 (four-carbon) to form 
\f0\b citrate 
\f1\b0 (six-carbon). \cb1 \
\ls3\ilvl0\cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f0\b \cf0 \cb1 2.
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Citrate undergoes rearrangements producing 
\f0\b 2 CO\dn6 2 
\f1\b0 \up0 and 
\f0\b 2 NADH
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\ls3\ilvl0\cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f0\b \cf0 \cb1 3.
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
After the 
\f2\i loss 
\f1\i0 of two CO\dn6 2\up0 , the resulting four-carbon molecule produces 
\f0\b 1 GTP 
\f1\b0 through 
\f2\i substrate-level phosphorylation
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \
\ls3\ilvl0\cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f0\b \cf0 \cb1 4.
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The molecule will now transfer electrons to 
\f0\b 1 FAD\up10 +
\f1\b0 \up0 , which is reduced into 
\f0\b 1 FADH\dn6 2\up0 . 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\ls3\ilvl0\cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f0\b \cf0 \cb1 5.
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Lastly, the molecule is converted back into 
\f0\b oxaloacetate 
\f1\b0 and also gives electrons to produce 
\f0\b 1 NADH
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\ls3\ilvl0\cb3 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f0\b \cf0 \cb1 6.
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Two acetyl-CoA molecules produces 4 CO\dn6 2 \up0 + 6 NADH + 2 FADH\dn6 2 \up0 + 2 GTP. \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \cb3 4. Oxidative phosphorylation 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Electron carriers (NADH + FADH\cf2 \cb3 \dn6 2\cf2 \cb3 \up0 ) + O\cf2 \cb3 \dn6 2 
\f3\b0 \cf2 \cb3 \up0 \uc0\u8594 
\f0\b  ATP + H\cf2 \cb3 \dn6 2\cf2 \cb3 \up0 O 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\cb3 The 
\f0\b electron transport chain (ETC) 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b chemiosmosis 
\f1\b0 (ions moving down 
\f2\i electrochemical gradient
\f1\i0 ) work together to 
\f0\b produce ATP 
\f1\b0 in oxidative phosphorylation. Oxygen acts as a 
\f2\i final electron acceptor 
\f1\i0 and gets reduced into 
\f0\b water
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 ETC goal: 
\f1\b0 Regenerate electron carriers and create an electrochemical gradient to power ATP production. \cb1 \
\cb3 The mitochondrial 
\f0\b inner membrane 
\f1\b0 is the ETC for 
\f2\i eukaryotes 
\f1\i0 while the 
\f0\b cell membrane 
\f1\b0 is the ETC for 
\f2\i prokaryotes
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \
\cb3 Four protein complexes 
\f0\b I-IV 
\f1\b0 are responsible for moving electrons through a series of 
\f0\b oxidation-reduction (redox) reactions 
\f1\b0 in the ETC
\f0\b . 
\f1\b0 As the series of redox reactions occurs, protons are pumped from the 
\f2\i mitochondrial matrix 
\f1\i0 to the 
\f2\i intermembrane space
\f1\i0 , forming an 
\f0\b electrochemical gradient
\f1\b0 . This is the reason the intermembrane space is highly 
\f0\b acidic
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 NADH 
\f1\b0 is more effective and drops electrons off directly at 
\f0\b complex-I
\f1\b0 , regenerating 
\f0\b NAD\cf2 \cb3 \up10 +
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 \up0 . \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 FADH\cf2 \cb3 \dn6 2  
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 \up0 drops electrons off at the second protein 
\f0\b complex-II
\f1\b0 , regenerating 
\f0\b FAD\cf2 \cb3 \up10 +
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 \up0 . However, this results in 
\f2\i less 
\f1\i0 pumping of protons due to the bypassing of complex-I. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Chemiosmosis goal: 
\f1\b0 Use the proton electrochemical gradient (
\f0\b proton-motive force
\f1\b0 ) to synthesize ATP. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 ATP synthase 
\f1\b0 is a channel protein that provides a 
\f2\i hydrophilic tunnel 
\f1\i0 to allow protons to flow 
\f0\b down 
\f1\b0 their electrochemical gradient (from the 
\f2\i intermembrane space 
\f1\i0 back to the 
\f2\i mitochondrial matrix
\f1\i0 ). The 
\f0\b spontaneous 
\f1\b0 movement of protons generates energy that is used to convert 
\f0\b ADP + P\cf2 \cb3 \dn6 i 
\f1\b0 \cf2 \cb3 \up0 into 
\f0\b ATP
\f1\b0 , a condensation reaction that is 
\f0\b endergonic 
\f1\b0 (requires energy +nonspontaneous = +\uc0\u916 G). \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 Fermentation 
\f1\b0\fs24 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 \cb3 Fermentation 
\f1\b0 is an 
\f2\i anaerobic 
\f1\i0 pathway (no oxygen) that 
\f0\b only relies on glycolysis 
\f1\b0 by converting the produced pyruvate into different molecules in order to 
\f2\i oxidize 
\f0\i0\b NADH back to NAD\cf2 \cb3 \up10 +\cf2 \cb3 \up0 . 
\f1\b0 Regenerating NAD\cf2 \cb3 \up10 + \cf2 \cb3 \up0 means glycolysis can continue to make ATP. Fermentation occurs within the cytosol. The 
\f2\i two 
\f1\i0 most common types of fermentation are lactic acid fermentation and alcohol fermentation. \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 1. Lactic acid fermentation 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Lactic acid fermentation 
\f1\b0 uses the 
\f0\b 2 NADH 
\f1\b0 from 
\f2\i glycolysis 
\f1\i0 to reduces the 
\f0\b 2 pyruvate 
\f1\b0 into 
\f0\b 2 lactic acid
\f1\b0 . Thus, NADH is 
\f2\i oxidized 
\f1\i0 back to NAD\cf2 \cb3 \up10 + \cf2 \cb3 \up0 so that glycolysis may continue. This happens frequently in 
\f2\i muscle cells 
\f1\i0 and occurs continuously in 
\f2\i red blood cells
\f1\i0 , which do not have mitochondria for aerobic respiration. \cb1 \
\cb3 The 
\f0\b Cori cycle 
\f1\b0 is used to help convert lactate back into glucose once oxygen is available again. It 
\f0\b transports 
\f1\b0 the lactate to liver cells, where it can be 
\f2\i oxidized 
\f1\i0 back into pyruvate. Pyruvate can then be used to form glucose, which can be used for more ideal energy generation. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 \
2. Alcohol Fermentation 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Alcohol fermentation 
\f1\b0 uses the 
\f0\b 2 NADH 
\f1\b0 from 
\f2\i glycolysis 
\f1\i0 to convert the 
\f0\b 2 pyruvate 
\f1\b0 into 
\f0\b 2 ethanol
\f1\b0 . Thus, NADH is 
\f2\i oxidized 
\f1\i0 back to NAD\cf2 \cb3 \up10 + \cf2 \cb3 \up0 so that glycolysis may continue. However, this process has an extra step that first involves the 
\f0\b decarboxylation 
\f1\b0 of pyruvate into 
\f0\b acetaldehyde
\f1\b0 , which is only then 
\f2\i reduced 
\f1\i0 by NADH into ethanol. \
\
Types of organisms based on 
\f0\b ability to grow in oxygen: 
\f1\b0 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f4\b \cf2 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Obligate aerobes 
\f1\b0 - only perform aerobic respiration, so they need the presence of oxygen to survive. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f4\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Obligate anaerobes 
\f1\b0 - only undergo anaerobic respiration or fermentation, and oxygen is poison to them. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f4\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Facultative anaerobes 
\f1\b0 - can do aerobic respiration, anaerobic respiration, or fermentation, but prefers aerobic respiration because it generates the most ATP. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f4\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Microaerophiles 
\f1\b0 - only perform aerobic respiration, but high amounts of oxygen are harmful to them. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \

\f4\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Aerotolerant organisms 
\f1\b0 - only undergo anaerobic respiration or fermentation, but oxygen is not poisonous to them. \cb1 \
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf4 \cb3 Alternative Sources of Energy Generation 
\f1\b0\fs24 \cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\fs36 \cf2 \cb3 Molecules other than glucose such as 
\f0\b other types of carbohydrates, fats
\f1\b0 , and 
\f0\b proteins 
\f1\b0 can enter cellular respiration at various stages for energy generation. \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf2 \cb3 1. Other carbohydrates 
\f1\b0 mostly enter during 
\f2\i glycolysis
\f1\i0 . 
\f0\b Glycogenolysis 
\f1\b0 describes the release of 
\f2\i glucose-6-phosphate 
\f1\i0 from 
\f0\b glycogen
\f1\b0 , a highly branched 
\f2\i polysaccharide 
\f1\i0 of glucose. 
\f0\b Disaccharides 
\f1\b0 can undergo hydrolysis to release two carbohydrate 
\f2\i monomers
\f1\i0 , which can enter glycolysis. 
\f0\b Glycogenesis 
\f1\b0 refers to the reverse process - the conversion of glucose into 
\f2\i glycogen 
\f1\i0 to be stored in the liver when energy and fuel is sufficient. \
\

\f0\b 2. Fats 
\f1\b0 are mostly present in the body as 
\f0\b triglycerides
\f1\b0 . 
\f0\b Lipases 
\f1\b0 are required to first digest fats into free fatty acids and alcohols through a process called 
\f0\b lipolysis
\f1\b0 . These digested pieces then can be absorbed by 
\f0\b enterocytes 
\f1\b0 in the small intestine and 
\f2\i reform 
\f1\i0 triglycerides. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Adipocytes 
\f1\b0 are cells that store fat (
\f2\i triglycerides
\f1\i0 ) and have hormone sensitive 
\f0\b lipase 
\f1\b0 enzymes to help release triglycerides back into 
\f2\i circulation 
\f1\i0 as 
\f0\b lipoproteins 
\f1\b0 or as free fatty acids bound by a protein called 
\f0\b albumin
\f1\b0 . \

\f0\b Chylomicrons 
\f1\b0 are 
\f2\i lipoprotein 
\f1\i0 transport structures formed by the 
\f2\i fusing 
\f1\i0 of triglycerides with proteins, phospholipids, and cholesterol. They leave enterocytes and enter 
\f0\b lacteals
\f1\b0 , small 
\f2\i lymphatic vessels 
\f1\i0 that take fats to the rest of the body. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Low-density lipoproteins (LDLs) 
\f1\b0 - low density of proteins, considered 
\f2\i unhealthy 
\f1\i0 because they transport cholesterol to the peripheral tissues, where it can cause 
\f2\i vessel blockage
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 High-density lipoproteins (HDLs) 
\f1\b0 - high density of proteins, considered 
\f2\i healthy 
\f1\i0 because they bring cholesterol to the 
\f0\b liver 
\f1\b0 to make 
\f2\i bile
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \
\cb3 When a 
\f0\b glycerol 
\f1\b0 molecule travels to the liver, it can undergo a conversion to enter glycolysis or make 
\f2\i new glucose 
\f1\i0 via 
\f0\b gluconeogenesis 
\f1\b0 at the liver. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Free fatty acids 
\f1\b0 undergo 
\f0\b beta-oxidation 
\f1\b0 to be converted into 
\f0\b acetyl-CoA
\f1\b0 . Beta-oxidation requires an initial 
\f0\b investment of ATP
\f1\b0 , but then is continuously 
\f2\i cleaved 
\f1\i0 to yield two-carbon acetyl-CoA molecules (which can be used in the Krebs cycle for ATP generation) and electron carriers (NADH + FADH\cf2 \cb3 \dn6 2 \cf2 \cb3 \up0 - produces more ATP). \cb1 \
\

\f0\b \cb3 3. Proteins 
\f1\b0 are the 
\f2\i least desirable 
\f1\i0 energy source because the processes to get them into cellular respiration take considerable energy and proteins are needed for many 
\f2\i essential functions 
\f1\i0 in the body. \cb1 \
\cb3 They are broken down into 
\f0\b amino acids
\f1\b0 , which must first undergo 
\f0\b oxidative deamination 
\f1\b0 (removal of NH\cf2 \cb3 \dn6 3\cf2 \cb3 \up0 ) before being shuttled to various parts of cellular respiration. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Ammonia (NH\cf2 \cb3 \dn6 3\cf2 \cb3 \up0 ) 
\f1\b0 is toxic, so it must be converted into 
\f0\b uric acid 
\f1\b0 or 
\f0\b urea 
\f1\b0 depending on the 
\f2\i species 
\f1\i0 and excreted from the body. For example, humans convert ammonia into urea, which is excreted as 
\f0\b urine
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\
\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\uc0\u8232 \
\
}