{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;
\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial-BoldMT;\f4\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f5\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red49\green112\blue185;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c23922\c52157\c77647;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;
}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Biological Laboratory Techniques for Nucleic Acids and Proteins 
\f1\b0 \cf4 \cb3  \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf4 \cb3 1. Karyotyping
\f1\b0 : 
\f2\i observing chromosomes 
\f1\i0 under light microscope during 
\f2\i metaphase
\f1\i0 . Can be used to diagnose conditions involving chromosomal aberrations, breakages, aneuploidies (e.g. Down\'92s syndrome or trisomy 21). \

\f0\b \
2. DNA sequencing
\f1\b0 : sequencing nucleotides in fragments of DNA. 2 methods are 
\f0\b dideoxy chain termination 
\f1\b0 or 
\f0\b Sanger sequencing 
\f1\b0 (
\f2\i older
\f1\i0 ) and 
\f0\b next generation sequencing 
\f1\b0 (
\f2\i newer
\f1\i0 ). Can sequence complete genomes piece by piece. In humans 
\f0\b single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
\f1\b0 serve as markers for disease causing genes. \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f3\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Recombinant DNA 
\f1\b0 is produced when 
\f0\b restriction enzymes 
\f1\b0 cut DNA at 
\f0\b palindromic sequences 
\f1\b0 generating 
\f2\i sticky ends 
\f1\i0 (have 
\f2\i unpaired 
\f1\i0 nucleotides) or 
\f2\i blunt ends 
\f1\i0 (have 
\f2\i paired 
\f1\i0 nucleotides)
\f2\i . \

\f3\i0\b \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Restriction fragment length polymorphisms 
\f1\b0 (
\f0\b RFLPs
\f1\b0 ) are 
\f2\i unique 
\f1\i0 lengths of DNA from restriction enzymes, allows for 
\f2\i comparison between individuals
\f1\i0 . Analyzes 
\f2\i non-coding 
\f1\i0 DNA (
\f2\i coding DNA 
\f1\i0 is 
\f2\i highly conserved
\f1\i0 ). \cb1 \
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 3. DNA fingerprinting
\f1\b0 : identifies individuals through unique aspects of DNA such as 
\f2\i RFLPs 
\f1\i0 and 
\f0\b short tandem repeats 
\f1\b0 (STR\'92s). Used in paternity and forensic cases. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 \
4. Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR)
\f1\b0 : 
\f2\i automated 
\f1\i0 process creating 
\f2\i millions of copies of DNA 
\f1\i0 in 3 steps: \cb1 \
\cb3 I. 
\f0\b Denaturation 
\f1\b0 (~95 \'b0C): 
\f2\i heating 
\f1\i0 separates DNA into 
\f2\i single strands
\f1\i0 .\cb1 \
\cb3 II. 
\f0\b Primer annealing 
\f1\b0 (~65 \'b0C): DNA primers 
\f2\i hybridize 
\f1\i0 with single strands. \cb1 \
\cb3 III. 
\f0\b Elongation 
\f1\b0 (~70 \'b0C): nucleotides are added to the 3\'92 end of DNA using 
\f2\i Taq 
\f0\i0\b polymerase
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 5.
\f1\b0 \cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 
\f0\b Bacterial cloning
\f1\b0 : cloning 
\f2\i eukaryotic gene 
\f1\i0 products in 
\f2\i prokaryotic cells
\f1\i0 . Used to produce medicine.\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f4 \cf4 \uc0\u9679  
\f1 Protocol: 
\f0\b Processed mRNA 
\f1\b0 for eukaryotic gene is isolated then treated with 
\f0\b reverse transcriptase 
\f1\b0 to make 
\f0\b cDNA 
\f5\b0 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 \cf4 \cb3 cDNA incorporated into 
\f0\b plasmid 
\f1\b0 (transfer 
\f0\b vector
\f1\b0 ) using reverse transcriptase and 
\f0\b DNA ligase 
\f5\b0 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 \cf4 \cb3 vector taken up by 
\f0\b competent bacterial cells 
\f1\b0 (can undergo transformation; made competent using 
\f2\i electroporation 
\f1\i0 or 
\f2\i heat shock
\f1\i0 ) and undergo 
\f0\b transformation 
\f5\b0 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 \cf4 \cb3 gene of interest is found using 
\f0\b antibiotic resistance 
\f1\b0 (antibiotic resistant gene attached to target gene) or 
\f0\b color change 
\f1\b0 (vectors containing genes making cells blue) methods. \cb1 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 6. Gel electrophoresis
\f1\b0 \cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
: separates DNA fragments by 
\f2\i charge 
\f1\i0 and 
\f2\i size
\f1\i0 . An electric field is applied to 
\f0\b agarose gel 
\f1\b0 (
\f2\i top 
\f1\i0 = negative cathode, 
\f2\i bottom 
\f1\i0 = positive anode). 
\f2\i Smaller 
\f1\i0 fragments travel 
\f2\i further 
\f1\i0 from top of gel. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
7. S\cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
outhern blotting
\f1\b0 : identifies fragments of 
\f2\i known 
\f1\i0 DNA sequence in a large population of DNA. Electrophoresed DNA separated into 
\f2\i single strands 
\f1\i0 and identified via 
\f2\i complementary 
\f0\i0\b DNA probe
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
8. \cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Northern blotting
\f1\b0 : identifying fragments of 
\f2\i known 
\f1\i0 RNA using an 
\f0\b RNA probe
\f1\b0 . \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 \
9. Western blotting
\f1\b0 : 
\f2\i quantifies 
\f1\i0 amount of target protein in a sample using sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis or 
\f0\b SDS PAGE 
\f1\b0 (proteins 
\f2\i denatured 
\f1\i0 and given 
\f2\i negative charge proportional to their mass
\f1\i0 ). Treated with 
\f0\b primary antibody 
\f1\b0 (binds to target protein) and 
\f0\b secondary antibody 
\f1\b0 (attached to 
\f2\i indicator 
\f1\i0 and binds to primary antibody). \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 \
10. Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA)
\f1\b0 : determines if a person has a 
\f2\i specific antigen
\f1\i0 . Important to diagnose diseases (e.g. HIV). Antibodies are placed on a microtiter plate and with antigens and change color. \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
11.
\f1\b0 \cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 
\f0\b Pulse chase experiments
\f1\b0 : useful for studying gene expression and the fate of proteins by viewing how a protein moves through a cell. During the 
\f0\b pulse phase 
\f1\b0 amino acids are radioactively labeled and then incorporated into proteins. The 
\f0\b chase phase 
\f2\i\b0 prevents 
\f1\i0 radioactively labelled protein production. Using simple staining, the radioactive proteins can be tracked. \cb1 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 Genomics 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Genomics 
\f1\b0 is the study of all genes present in an organism\'92s genome and how they interact. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 1.
\f1\b0 \cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 A 
\f0\b genomic library 
\f1\b0 stores the DNA of an organism\'92s genome. DNA fragments are incorporated into 
\f2\i plasmids 
\f1\i0 and can be screened for by using 
\f2\i antibiotic resistance 
\f1\i0 and 
\f2\i color changing 
\f1\i0 techniques. They are then cloned via 
\f2\i bacterial cloning
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
2. \cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
DNA microarrays 
\f1\b0 contain thousands of 
\f2\i DNA probes 
\f1\i0 that bind to complementary DNA fragments, allowing researchers to see which genes are expressed. \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f4 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f1 \cf4 \cb3 Protocol: isolate a cell and 
\f2\i remove mRNA 
\f1\i0 (
\f2\i active transcription
\f1\i0 ) 
\f5 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 \cf4 \cb3 synthesize 
\f2\i cDNA 
\f1\i0 from mRNA using 
\f2\i reverse transcriptase 
\f5\i0 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 \cf4 \cb3 hybridize cDNA with DNA probes 
\f5 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 \cf4 \cb3 examine microarray for fluorescence 
\f5 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 \cf4 \cb3 compare microarray with the 
\f2\i sequenced genome
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 3.
\f1\b0 \cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 
\f0\b Transgenic animals 
\f1\b0 are models used to identify the 
\f2\i function of a gene
\f1\i0 . A gene is taken from one organism and inserted into another. Can be used for 
\f2\i mass medication production 
\f1\i0 (e.g. clotting factors for hemophiliacs). \cb1 \
\cb3 \

\f0\b \cf0 \cb1 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 4.
\f1\b0 \cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 
\f0\b Reproductive cloning
\f1\b0 : producing a 
\f2\i genetic copy 
\f1\i0 of an organism from a 
\f0\b somatic cell
\f1\b0 . A 
\f2\i multipotent cell 
\f1\i0 must be converted to a 
\f2\i totipotent cell
\f1\i0 . E.g. 
\f0\b Dolly 
\f1\b0 the sheep. \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f3\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Totipotent cells
\f1\b0 : can differentiate into an 
\f2\i entire organism 
\f1\i0 (including 
\f2\i extraembryonic membranes). 
\f1\i0 E.g. zygote 
\f5 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u8594  
\f1 \cf4 \cb3 morula. \cb1 \

\f3\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Pluripotent cells
\f1\b0 : can differentiate into the 
\f2\i three germ layers 
\f1\i0 (endoderm, mesoderm, ectoderm). 
\f2\i Cannot 
\f1\i0 give rise to extraembryonic membranes. \cb1 \

\f3\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Multipotent cells
\f1\b0 : can give rise to 
\f2\i some 
\f1\i0 of the three germ layers - 
\f2\i not all
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
}