{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;
\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial-BoldMT;\f4\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red49\green112\blue185;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;
\red66\green66\blue66;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c23922\c52157\c77647;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;
\cssrgb\c32941\c32941\c32941;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat2\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Cell Membrane 
\f1\b0\fs24 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs36 \cf4 \cb3 Cell membranes 
\f1\b0 hold cellular contents and are mainly made up of 
\f0\b phospholipids
\f1\b0 , 
\f0\b cholesterol
\f1\b0 , and 
\f0\b proteins
\f1\b0 : \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 1.  Phospholipids 
\f1\b0 - 
\f0\b glycerol backbone
\f1\b0 , 
\f0\b one phosphate group 
\f1\b0 (hydrophilic)
\f0\b , 
\f1\b0 and 
\f0\b two fatty acid tails 
\f1\b0 (hydrophobic). 
\f0\b Amphipathic 
\f1\b0 because the molecules have both 
\f2\i polar 
\f1\i0 and 
\f2\i nonpolar 
\f1\i0 parts, allowing them to form a 
\f0\b lipid bilayer 
\f1\b0 in an 
\f2\i aqueous 
\f1\i0 environment. \cb1 \
2.  
\f0\b \cb3 Cholesterol 
\f1\b0 - has 
\f0\b four fused hydrocarbon rings 
\f1\b0 and is a 
\f0\b precursor 
\f1\b0 to 
\f2\i steroid hormones
\f1\i0 . Also 
\f0\b amphipathic 
\f1\b0 and helps regulate membrane 
\f0\b fluidity
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
3.  
\f0\b \cb3 Membrane proteins 
\f1\b0 - are either 
\f0\b integral 
\f1\b0 or 
\f0\b peripheral 
\f1\b0 membrane proteins. \
\cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Integral (transmembrane) proteins 
\f1\b0 traverse the entire bilayer, so they must be 
\f0\b amphipathic
\f1\b0 . Their 
\f2\i nonpolar 
\f1\i0 parts lie in the middle of the bilayer while their 
\f2\i polar 
\f1\i0 ends extend out into the aqueous environment. Usually assist in 
\f2\i cell signaling 
\f1\i0 or 
\f2\i transport
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Peripheral membrane proteins 
\f1\b0 are found on the 
\f2\i outside 
\f1\i0 of the bilayer, and they are generally hydrophilic. Below are some possible 
\f2\i functions
\f1\i0 : \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f3\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0 \cf4 \cb3 Receptor 
\f1\b0 - trigger 
\f2\i secondary responses 
\f1\i0 within the cell for signaling. \cb1 \

\f3\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0 \cf4 \cb3 Adhesion 
\f1\b0 - attaches cells to other things (eg. other cells) and act as 
\f0\b anchors 
\f1\b0 for the 
\f2\i cytoskeleton
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \

\f3\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0 \cf4 \cb3 Cellular recognition 
\f1\b0 - proteins which have carbohydrate chains (
\f0\b glycoproteins
\f1\b0 ). Used by cells to recognize other cells. \cb1 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 The 
\f0\b fluid mosaic model 
\f1\b0 describes how the components that make up the cell membrane can 
\f2\i move freely 
\f1\i0 within the membrane (\'93
\f0\b fluid
\f1\b0 \'94). Furthermore, the cell membrane contains many different kinds of structures (\'93
\f0\b mosaic
\f1\b0 \'94). \cb1 \
\cb3 The 
\f2\i fluidity 
\f1\i0 of the cell membrane can be affected by: \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f4 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Temperature 
\f1\b0 - 
\f4 \cf5 \cb3 \uc0\u8593  
\f1 \cf4 \cb3 temperatures 
\f2\i increase 
\f1\i0 fluidity while 
\f4 \cf5 \cb3 \uc0\u8595  
\f1 \cf4 \cb3 temperatures 
\f2\i decrease 
\f1\i0 it. \cb1 \

\f4 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Cholesterol 
\f1\b0 - 
\f2\i holds 
\f1\i0 membrane together at high temperatures and 
\f2\i keeps 
\f1\i0 membrane 
\f2\i fluid 
\f1\i0 at low temperatures. \cb1 \

\f4 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Degrees of unsaturation 
\f1\b0 - 
\f2\i saturated 
\f1\i0 fatty acids pack more tightly than 
\f2\i unsaturated 
\f1\i0 fatty acids, which have double bonds that may introduce 
\f2\i kinks
\f1\i0 . 
\f2\i Trans-unsaturated 
\f1\i0 fatty acids pack more tightly than 
\f2\i cis-unsaturated 
\f1\i0 fatty acids (which have a more severe kink). \cb1 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 Crossing Cell Membranes 
\f1\b0\fs24 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\fs36 \cf4 \cb3 Cells must 
\f0\b regulate 
\f1\b0 the traveling of substances across the 
\f2\i cell membrane. 
\f1\i0 3 types of 
\f0\b transport 
\f1\b0 across the cell membrane: \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 1. 
\f1\b0 \cf4 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 
\f0\b Simple diffusion 
\f1\b0 - flow of 
\f2\i small, uncharged, nonpolar 
\f1\i0 substances (eg. O\cf4 \cb3 \dn6 2 \cf4 \cb3 \up0 and CO\cf4 \cb3 \dn6 2\cf4 \cb3 \up0 ) across the cell membrane down their 
\f2\i concentration gradient 
\f1\i0 (high to low) 
\f2\i without 
\f1\i0 using energy.
\f4 \cf4 \cb3 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0\cf4 \uc0\u9679   
\f0\b Osmosis 
\f1\b0 is a type of simple diffusion that involves water molecules (water is polar, but is 
\f2\i small 
\f1\i0 enough to cross the membrane). 
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0
\ls2\ilvl0\cf4 2.  \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Facilitated transport 
\f1\b0 - 
\f2\i integral proteins 
\f1\i0 allow 
\f2\i larger, hydrophilic 
\f1\i0 molecules to cross the cell membrane. \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0

\f4 \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f1 These proteins can be 
\f0\b uniporters 
\f1\b0 (single substance, single direction), 
\f0\b symporters 
\f1\b0 (two substances, same direction), or 
\f0\b antiporters 
\f1\b0 (two substances, opposite directions). \cb1 \

\f4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f1 Also, they can also be classified as 
\f0\b channel proteins 
\f1\b0 (open 
\f2\i tunnel 
\f1\i0 that faces 
\f2\i both 
\f1\i0 sides of bilayer) and 
\f0\b carrier proteins 
\f1\b0 (binds to molecule on one side and 
\f2\i changes shape 
\f1\i0 to bring it to the other side). \cb1 \

\f4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0\b Passive diffusion 
\f1\b0 is a 
\f2\i type of 
\f1\i0 facilitated transport that is performed by 
\f2\i channel proteins
\f1\i0 , bringing molecules down their 
\f0\b concentration gradient 
\f1\b0 without energy use (similar to simple diffusion, but a 
\f2\i protein 
\f1\i0 channel is used). Examples include 
\f0\b porins 
\f1\b0 for hydrophilic molecules and 
\f0\b ion channels 
\f1\b0 for ions. 
\f0\b \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0
\cf4 3.  Active transport 
\f1\b0 - substances travel 
\f2\i against 
\f1\i0 their concentration gradient and require the consumption of 
\f0\b energy 
\f1\b0 by 
\f0\b carrier proteins
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f3\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0 \cf4 \cb3 Primary active transport 
\f1\b0 uses 
\f2\i ATP hydrolysis 
\f1\i0 to pump molecules against their concentration gradient. For example, the 
\f0\b sodium-potassium (Na\cf4 \cb3 \up10 +\cf4 \cb3 \up0 /K\cf4 \cb3 \up10 +\cf4 \cb3 \up0 ) pump 
\f1\b0 establishes 
\f2\i membrane potentia
\f1\i0 l.\cb1 \

\f3\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  
\f0 \cf4 \cb3 Secondary active transport 
\f1\b0 uses 
\f0\b free energy 
\f1\b0 released when 
\f2\i other 
\f1\i0 molecules flow 
\f2\i down 
\f1\i0 their concentration gradient (gradient established by 
\f2\i primary active transport
\f1\i0 ) to pump the 
\f2\i molecule of interest 
\f1\i0 across the membrane. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 Cytosis 
\f1\b0 refers to the 
\f2\i bulk transport 
\f1\i0 of large, hydrophilic molecules across the cell membrane and requires 
\f2\i energy 
\f1\i0 (
\f0\b active transport mechanism
\f1\b0 ). \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Endocytosis 
\f1\b0 involves the cell membrane wrapping around an 
\f2\i extracellular 
\f1\i0 substance, internalizing it into the cell via a 
\f0\b vesicle 
\f1\b0 or 
\f0\b vacuole
\f1\b0 . Below are different forms of endocytosis: \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f3\b \cf4 \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Phagocytosis 
\f1\b0 - cellular 
\f2\i eating 
\f1\i0 around solid objects. \cb1 \

\f3\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Pinocytosis 
\f1\b0 - cellular 
\f2\i drinking 
\f1\i0 around dissolved materials (liquids). \cb1 \

\f3\b \cb3 \uc0\u9679  \'a0
\f0 Receptor-mediated endocytosis 
\f1\b0 - requires the binding of dissolved molecules to 
\f0\b peripheral membrane receptor proteins, 
\f1\b0 which initiates endocytosis. \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Exocytosis 
\f1\b0 is the 
\f2\i opposite 
\f1\i0 of endocytosis, 
\f2\i releasing 
\f1\i0 material to the extracellular environment through 
\f0\b vesicle secretion
\f1\b0 . \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \
\
\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb1 \
}