{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red49\green112\blue185;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c23922\c52157\c77647;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;
}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs48 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Molecular Genetic of Viruses 
\f1\b0\fs36 \cf4 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 Viruses 
\f1\b0 are 
\f2\i not living 
\f1\i0 because they must infect living cells to multiply. \cb1 \
\cb3 The 
\f0\b capsid 
\f1\b0 is a viral protein coat that is made of subunits called 
\f0\b capsomeres
\f1\b0 . Some viruses also have a 
\f0\b phospholipid envelope 
\f1\b0 that they pick up from the 
\f2\i host cell membrane
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 \
Two viral life cycle types
\f1\b0 : \cb1 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl300\sa266\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf4 \cb3 1. Lysogenic cycle 
\f1\b0 - virus is considered 
\f2\i dormant 
\f1\i0 because it 
\f0\b inserts 
\f1\b0 its own genome into the host\'92s genome and 
\f2\i does not harm 
\f1\i0 the host. Each time the host genome undergoes replication, so does the viral genome. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 2. Lytic cycle 
\f1\b0 - virus takes over host to 
\f0\b replicate 
\f1\b0 and 
\f2\i does harm 
\f1\i0 the host. The viral particles produced can 
\f0\b lyse 
\f1\b0 the host cell to find other hosts to infect. \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 It is important to note that viruses can 
\f0\b switch 
\f1\b0 between the 
\f2\i lysogenic 
\f1\i0 and 
\f2\i lytic cycles
\f1\i0 . For example, 
\f0\b favorable conditions 
\f1\b0 can stimulate a virus in the lysogenic cycle to replicate and enter to lytic cycle. \cb1 \

\f0\b \cb3 Retroviruses 
\f1\b0 (eg. HIV) have an 
\f2\i RNA genome 
\f1\i0 that infects host cells. They contain an enzyme called 
\f0\b reverse transcriptase
\f1\b0 , which 
\f2\i converts 
\f1\i0 their RNA into cDNA (complementary DNA). The cDNA can integrate into the host genome and enter the 
\f2\i lysogenic cycle
\f1\i0 . \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 \
}